© Copyright Reserved Central Chinmaya Mission Trust
All rights reserved. No part (either whole or part) may be reproduced, copied,
scanned, stored in a retrieval system, recorded or transmitted in any form or
by any means, including but not limited to electronic and mechanical means,
without the prior written permission of the publisher.
•
Published by:
Chinmaya Prakashan
The Publications Division of
Central Chinmaya Mission Trust
Sandeepany Sadhanalaya
Saki Vihar Road, Powai, Mumbai 400072, India
Tel.: +91-22-2803 4900
Email: ccmtpublications@chinmayamission.com
Website: www.chinmayamission.com
•
Distribution Centre in USA:
Chinmaya Mission West
Publications Division
560 Bridgetown Pike
Langhorne, PA 19053, USA
Tel.: 1-888-CMW-READ, (215) 396-0390 Fax: (215) 396-9710
Email: publications@chinmayamission.org
Website: www.chinmayapublications.org
•
Designed by:
Chinmaya Kalpanam, Mumbai
•
Digitized by:
Chinmaya Digital Media, Mumbai
Contents
Ch. No.Subject Matter Verses
Publisher’s Note
About Aṣṭāvakra-Gītā
General Introduction
1 Self – Witness in All 1 – 20
2 The Marvellous Self 1 – 25
3 Self in All – All in Self 1 – 14
4 Glory of Realisation 1 – 6
5 Four Methods – Dissolution of Ego1 – 4
6 The Self Supreme 1 – 4
7 That Tranquil Self 1 – 5
8 Bondage and Freedom 1 – 4
9 Indifference 1 – 8
10 Dispassion 1 – 8
11 Self As Pure Intelligence 1 – 8
12 How to Abide in the Self 1 – 8
13 The Bliss Absolute 1 – 7
14 Tranquillity 1 – 4
15 Brahman – The Absolute Reality1 – 20
16 Self-abidance – Instructions1 – 11
17 Aloneness of the Self 1 – 20
18 The Goal 1 – 100
19 The Grandeur of the Self 1 – 8
20 The Absolute State 1 – 14
Alphabetical Index to Ślokas
Transliteration and Pronunciation Guide
In the book, Devanāgarī characters are transliterated according to
the scheme adopted by the International Congress of Orientalists at
Athens in 1912. In it one fixed pronunciation value is given to each
letter; f, q, w, x and z are not called to use. According to this scheme:
Publisher’s Note
Chinmaya Prakashan has great pleasure in presenting the 3rd
revised edition of ‘Aṣṭāvakra Gītā’ to all spiritual seekers.
In the earlier edition, readability was poor in small print. This
aspect is taken care of in the revised layout. Keeping in view the
high standing of this book in thought of Vedānta, to help readers not
knowing Sanskrit, transliteration has been added even to references.
In this revised edition, diacritical marks are used for transliteration
of Sanskrit words in the verses as well as commentary. The English
plural sign ‘s’ has been added to the Sanskrit words directly without
a hyphen. To be true to the Sanskrit text in transliteration, we have
used ‘Brāhmaṇa’ for the first varṇa instead of the commonly used
word ‘Brahmin’. It need not be confused with the term ‘Brahman’ of
the Vedāntins.
A key to transliteration and pronunciation has been added in the
beginning, while alphabetical index to ślokas at the end of the book.
Sincere efforts have been made to eliminate errors and create a
fresh and appealing design. The Chinmaya Sampadan and
Chinmaya Kalpanam deserve compliments in bringing this revised
edition and we hope seekers experience the depth of this profound
Knowledge.
Chinmaya Prakashan
Publication Division of CCMT
6th July, 2016
Mumbai 400072

About Aṣṭāvakra-Gītā
In communicating to the seekers the unsurpassing beauty and
indefinable perfections of the Absolute, the Upaniṣads stammer, the
Brahmasūtras exhaust themselves and the Bhagavad-gītā hesitates
with an excusable shyness. A theme, in dealing with which, even
these mighty books of Hinduism are thus, at best, unsatisfactory. We
must, in sheer gratitude, admire Aṣṭāvakra Saṁhitā for the brilliant
success it has achieved in communicating, through words, perhaps
more clearly, the nature and glory of the supreme Reality, than by
Prasthāna Traya.
The student of this saṁhitā is himself giving the autobio-data of
the Liberated in life. We have here in this book a revealing
autobiography of the saint, the Liberated in life in King Janaka.
Beyond all assertions and denial, beyond the concepts of
bondage and Liberation, lies this realm of the Self, wherein there is
neither the individual ego (jīva), nor is there even the supreme
Reality (Brahman)!
Swami Chinmayananda

General Introduction
Among the world’s classical works on contemplative experiences,
Aṣṭāvakra-gītā, which is sometimes called Aṣṭāvakra Saṁhitā, is a
unique textbook. It systematically deals with the mystical
experiences of an individual in his flight to the transcendental peace
and Bliss. It has been said that the thoughts of this Gītā are
compatible with the ‘Dialogues of Plato’ and the Bhagavad-gītā, as
all of them truthfully record the universal insight and spiritual
experiences which a seeker gathers during moments of his intense
meditation.
As in Bhagavad-gītā, here in Aṣṭāvakra-gītā also, we find the
subtle philosophical truths expounded in the form of a lucid dialogue
between the King-seer (rāja-ṛṣi) Janaka, the disciple and Aṣṭāvakra,
the Teacher.
Aṣṭāvakra-gītā also known as Aṣṭāvakra Saṁhitā is a short
treatise on Advaita Vedānta in the style followed in Upaniṣads
meaning in the form of a dialogue between Aṣṭāvakra, the Guru and
his disciple, the King-seer Janaka. This fascinating legend is vividly
described in the epic, Mahābhārata1 where Maharṣi Lomaśa
narrates it to Dharmaputra Yudhiṣṭhira, the eldest of Pāṇḍava
princes.
In general introduction and later in the commentary, it is
repeatedly emphasised that Aṣṭāvakra-gītā is meant only for those
advanced sādhakas who have purified their minds through sādhanā
and are engaged in meditation. To such committed students alone
would this book show light and be a true guide. To the unprepared,
immature students, the subtle thoughts contained in this Gītā can be
explosively dangerous and result in erasing their faith entirely from
the higher Reality.
Aṣṭāvakra in Sanskrit means – aṣṭa meaning eight and vakra is
crooked or curved – with eight crooked (limbs). How he was cursed
by his father while still in his mother’s womb has been explained.
In Mahābhārata2, the legend of Aṣṭāvakra is fascinating and
vivid. When Aṣṭāvakra was in the womb of Sujātā, his mother, his
father, Kahor, a mighty student of the Vedas, used to read aloud the
sacred maṇḍalas, each day late into the nights. The unborn genius,
even from the womb, learnt the texts, and one day, the child from the
womb suddenly cried out, ‘Tut, Tut! Father, through your grace I
have already learned all the Vedas, even while I am in my mother’s
womb. But I am sorry to say that you often make mistakes in your
recitation.’ Enraged by this grave insult the father cursed his son and
the boy was therefore born deformed with eight curvatures in his
anatomy. As a result of the curse, he developed eight deformities like
hunch-backed, hump, knock-knees, bow-legs, flat-footed and was,
therefore, named Aṣṭāvakra.
The learned Kahor, pressed by his poverty, made a pilgrimage to
King Janaka’s court to beg for some royal patronage. There, he got
defeated in an intellectual dual with Śrī Bandī, the court-philosopher
of Janaka. The victorious paṇḍita Bandī employed the defeated
Brāhmaṇa in the service of his father, Varuṇa. Years rolled by and
the family had no news of the whereabouts of the revered Brāhmaṇa
Kahor.
Though a splendid student, Aṣṭāvakra in the school was teased
by his fellow students saying ‘you have no father’. The worried boy
returned home and enquired of his mother. The boy came to know
from his mother that his father had once gone to Janaka’s palace
and had not ever returned from there. Aṣṭāvakra, at that time, was
only a mere boy of 12 years. He decided to make enquiries and
started on his pilgrimage to Videha.
Janaka was a benevolent king and to have firsthand knowledge
of his subjects, he was on his rounds when he saw the young sage
limping steadily. After alighting from his horse, he prostrated before
the teenager sage, who was hardly twelve then. The deformities of
the young ascetic became more vivid when he moved and viewed
from close, the king felt aversion to the curvatures of his anatomy.
The young sage who was expert in yoga-vidyā as well as
established in Self-knowledge (ātma-jñāna) read the king’s mind and
addressed him as follows –
‘O King! Just as the shape of a temple does not affect the ākāśa
(sky), the crookedness of the physical body has no effect on Ᾱtmā. A
wise man has Ᾱtma-dṛṣṭi meaning he looks at the Reality behind this
manifested world, whereas an ignorant one has carma-dṛṣṭi meaning
he gets lost in names and forms.’
The king was taken aback by such an incise wisdom of the young
sage and requested him to grace his palace to which he acceded.
Aṣṭāvakra was, thus, given a place of honour in the king’s palace; he
removed all doubts from Janaka’s mind.
In Mahābhārata there is a slightly different version. Aṣṭāvakra
accompanied by his maternal uncle (of his own age) Śvetaketu
reached Janaka’s kingdom to observe mahāyajña being conducted
there, as also to search his father. The king was proceeding to
yajñaśālā and attendants accompanying him were diverting traffic to
clear passage for the king.
By his precise knowledge of śāstras, Aṣṭāvakra pointed out that a
Brāhmaṇa had priority in the right of passage over even the king. On
hearing, the king was impressed with the knowledge of the young
mendicant and acceded the point and requested him to proceed
ahead of him.
Although the mahāyajña was open only to established scholars,
the king took him along to the mahāyajña. On learning about his
motive of defeating Bandī – the royal scholar – the king tested his
knowledge of the śāstras by questioning. With appropriate and
precise answers he impressed the king who invited Bandī to engage
the young sage in arguments. Aṣṭāvakra defeated Bandī and thus
got his father released, where he proved that though physically a
boy, he had the wisdom of the ancients. There, in the court, the
handicapped boy defeated the revered philosopher, Bandī and won
the freedom of his father. The father let his son bathe in the river
Samaṅgā and blessed by the father the deformed child walked out of
the waters cured completely, a handsome boy of brilliant charms.
Aṣṭāvakra-gītā, both in its style and structure of composition
closely resembles the epics. It belongs to an age prior to the
systematisation of philosophical thoughts in India. Like the
Bhagavad-gītā it has simplicity of diction and clarity of expression,
without losing the forcefulness of language and the pregnancy of its
thoughts. Like the Bhagavad-gītā here also we find that the Teacher
refuses to indulge in any involved philosophical discussion, but the
Teacher constantly directs the entire attention of the student, on to
the spiritual Reality behind life and its expressions.
Erudite scholars after laborious study and research have
assigned Aṣṭāvakra-gītā to a period immediately after the Bhagavad-
gītā and just before the rise of the great philosophical schools.
Aṣṭāvakra-gītā must have appeared at a time close to the later
Upaniṣads – Śvetāśvatara, Muṇḍaka, Māṇḍūkya Kārikā and others.
There is a suspicion of a reference to the Buddhistic concept of non-
existence (śūnya-vāda).
Aṣṭāvakra-gītā does not show any inclination to accept a personal
God, as we find in the Bhagavad-gītā. In this sense, thoughts of
Aṣṭāvakra are more faithful to the major Upaniṣads and their
monistic idealism. To all advanced students of meditation Aṣṭāvakra-
gītā directly points out the way and the goal. Those who have not
had the early groundings in meditation and have not experienced the
inner silence of meditation, to them this Gītā is a mute instrument. To
the unprepared, the subtle thoughts of this Gītā can become
explosively dangerous. These can blast the student’s faith and can
even shake his entire hold of the higher Reality. To those who have
purified their minds and are engaged really in meditation, to such
committed students alone, this textbook can show light and can
serve as a true guide.
As an unrelenting non-dualist, rooted in the vivid experience of
the transcendental spiritual oneness, Saint Aṣṭāvakra never
compromises. He rejects completely the worlds of objects, emotions
and thoughts perceived through the delusory body, mind and
intellect. As such he refutes and totally rejects the principle of ‘māyā’.
To him there is neither an individual ego (jīva), nor a Creator (Īśvara),
nor any delusion (māyā), nor a universe (jagat) other than the one
infinite Consciousness, the Self. This clearly gives us an idea of the
platform of Aṣṭāvakra and the types of students whom he is
addressing. To Aṣṭāvakra there is only one goal to be aspired for and
reached and that is Self-knowledge through direct mystical intuition
which he calls as vijñāna.
The final spiritual experience in Aṣṭāvakra-gītā arises to profound
raptures of vision and insight and culminates in the sovereign unity
of the Self that dissolves all duality, such as the knower, knowledge
and knowing. In fact, the deeper essence of this Aṣṭāvakra-song
cannot be explained in words, but is to be experienced in the
dynamic silence of one’s own deepest meditations. It is addressed to
all the royal saints of the calibre of Janaka, to whom is attributed the
oft-quoted observation in Mahābhārata3 - ‘Infinite is indeed my
wealth, of which nothing is mine. If Mithilā is burnt, nothing that is
mine is burnt’.
In Aṣṭāvakra-gītā also Janaka declares4, ‘In fact one way, nothing
belongs to me; or in another way, everything is mine only.’
1 Vana Parva – chapter 132 to 134
2 Vana Parva – chapter 132 to 134.
3 anantamiva me vittaṁ yasya me nāsti kiñcana,
mithilāyāṁ pradīptāyāṁ na me kiñcana dahyate.
4 me nāsti kiñcana athavā me sarvam.

Chapter – 1
Self – Witness in All
Introduction
In this opening stanza of the Aṣṭāvakra-gītā, the brilliant disciple, the
royal-seer, Janaka, expresses his problems and the Teacher, totally
established as he is in the experience of the transcendental Truth,
answers the questions raised by the student. The pure effulgent Self
is ever the unattached and the peaceful, the all-knowing seer and
the witness of everything that is happening in all creatures. It is the
one supreme and eternal God, the Brahman or the ultimate Reality.
The perceived world of names and forms outside, and the
experienced worlds of emotions and thoughts within, all exist and
sport only in the all-pervading immutable Self.
This one universal Consciousness Supreme, which is the
substratum for the changing world of phenomena should be realised
through practice of meditation till we rise above the misconception
that we are the limited ego – the Self, reflected in our thoughts.
When I, the supreme Self, become conscious of and get utterly
identified with my body, mind and intellect, I become the limited ego,
the perceiver-feeler-thinker entity. This ego through its own illusions
misconceives the infinite Self as the sorrow ridden calamitous world
of birth and death. This individualised ego gets itself completely
bound to the wheel of happenings and appears to get crushed by the
world that it has imagined itself through its own delusions. When true
knowledge dawns, the misconceptions end and the little ego in the
meditator rediscovers itself to be the infinite Brahman.
जनक  उवाच
 ोि     ि ि
कथं   ानमवा ोित  कथं  मु  भ   िव ित।
वैरा ं  च  कथं   ा मेतद्   ूिह  मम   भो॥१॥
janaka uvāca
kathaṁ jñānamavāpnoti kathaṁ muktirbhaviṣyati,
vairāgyaṁ ca kathaṁ praptaṁ-etad brūhi mama prabho. (1)
कथम्  - how (man);  ानम्  - Knowledge; अवा ोित  - acquires; कथम्  -
how; मु  ः  – Liberation; भिव ित – comes; वैरा म्  – renunciation; च –
and; कथम्  – how;  ा म्  – is achieved; एतत्  – this;  ूिह – teach; मम –
me;  भो – O! Lord
Janaka said:
1. “Teach me this, O Lord! how can Knowledge be acquired? How
can Liberation come? How is renunciation achieved?”
When a patient approaches a doctor, it is the duty of the suffering
one to explain, as best as he can, of his difficulties, and the doctor
will then diagnose and prescribe remedies to cure the disease. If the
patient goes to the doctor and remains mum, the doctor will not be
able to immediately detect what exactly is the trouble in the patient.
Similarly, when a student reaches a spiritual Master, it is the duty of
the seeker to express his difficulties and from the doubts so
expressed by the student, the Teacher can evaluate the
psychological and spiritual problems in the student. Here we find the
Aṣṭāvakra-gītā opens with the questions raised by Janaka, the
disciple. The royal-seer asks three pertinent questions.
The ignorance of the post, in the dim light of the dusk, can
produce the illusion of a ghost. This illusory misapprehension of the
ghost, sprung from the non-apprehension of the post, frightens the
deluded observer and brings to him all his sorrows. From the
‘ignorance’ of the post is born the ghost. This ‘ignorance’ is
constituted of both these factors – the non-apprehension of Reality
and the misapprehension of the Self. This ‘ignorance’ can be
removed only by ‘Knowledge’. With the apprehension of the post, the
non-apprehension ends and when the non-apprehension of the post
has ended, the misapprehension of the ghost cannot remain. This
‘Knowledge’ alone is the antidote for ‘ignorance’.
The ‘ignorance’ of the spiritual essence, as the blissful immutable
Self, gives us the ‘misapprehensions’ of a world of plurality around
us and of a suffering miserable perceiver, the ego. These
‘misapprehensions’ of a subject object world can be ended only
when the ‘non-apprehension’ of the Self is ended. To apprehend the
Self is to have the ‘Knowledge’ of it. Hence, the student very aptly
asks the question,‘How can ‘Knowledge’ be acquired?’
A seeker, so long as he is recognising a world of objects,
emotions and thoughts, through his body, mind and intellect, cannot
escape his sense of limitations and his experiences of suffocating
sorrows. The world of joys and sorrows will buffet him mercilessly
amidst the roaring waves of the world’s tumultuous happenings. A
sensitive student cannot but feel himself bound and gagged
everywhere, at all times. Naturally, Janaka asks here in his second
question, ‘How can Liberation come?’ To liberate ourselves from our
identification with our own body, mind and intellect equipments is to
liberate ourselves from the thraldom of our ego and make us realise
our infinite Stature Divine.
In order to attain this sense of complete Liberation, we must learn
to detach from our own equipments of perceptions, feelings and
thoughts. Naturally, the subtle thinker in the disciple asks the third
question, ‘How is renunciation achieved?’ Each one will have to
discover in himself the capacity to renounce. Renunciation is not a
mere giving up of possession or a sudden cutting away from all
relationships of the world.
Without mental detachment, outer renunciation amounts to only
an unproductive calamitous escapism. To run away from life and its
duties is not to run into the spiritual dimensions.
Sense of attachment springs in us when the ego feels incomplete
and when, in its illusion, it hopes to become full and complete by the
acquisition, possession and enjoyment of objects which it perceives
outside itself. Thus, where plurality is experienced, there is a subject-
ego perceiving world of objects. In this sense of duality, the
perceiving-subject cannot avoid labelling and classifying things
perceived, and developing a sense of likes and dislikes for them.
The ego, thereafter, gets itself attached to the things it likes and
comes to feel extremely disturbed and, therefore, impatient with the
things that it dislikes.
As long as an individual lives in this sense of duality, he cannot
avoid his sense of attachment. The ego is that aspect of our
personality that perceives the plurality, and the ego arises in our
identifications with our body, mind and intellect. Therefore, true
renunciation or detachment is in withdrawing ourselves from our
equipments. How are we to withdraw our consciousness from our
equipments through meditation and come to experience the
infinitude of the Self as our own real nature is the deep significance
of this small looking question: ‘How is renunciation achieved?’
Attachment gurgles forth from ‘ignorance’ and renunciation or
unattachment flows out from ‘Knowledge’.
When the student has expressed himself exhaustively, the
Teacher elaborately answers each one of the questions raised by
Janaka and that constitutes this entire chapter.
अ ाव   उवाच
मु  िम िस  चे ात  िवषयान्  िवषव ज।
 माज वदयातोषस ं  पीयूषव ज॥२॥
aṣṭāvakra uvāca
muktim-icchasi cet-tāta viṣayān viṣavat-tyaja
kṣamārjava-dayā-toṣa-satyaṁ pīyūṣa-vad-bhaja. (2)
मु  म् – Liberation; इ िस – wish(you); चेत्  – if; तात  – O! child; िवषयान्
– the objects of the senses; िवषवत्  – like poison;  ज – reject;  मा  –
forgiveness; आज व – straightforwardness; दया – kindness; तोष –
cheerfulness; स म्  – truth; पीयूषवत्  – like nectar; भज – seek
Aṣṭāvakra said:
2. “If you aspire for Liberation, my child, reject the objects of the
senses as poison and seek forgiveness, straightforwardness,
kindness, cheerfulness and truth as nectar”.
In this pithy statement, the Teacher of the transcendental Reality,
Aṣṭāvakra, provides us with two unfailing schemes by which our
spiritual pilgrimage can always be smooth and ever assured of
success. Negatively we are shown what all we must give up and
positively we are told what are the values of life that we must
cultivate.
Mind is a ‘thought flow’. The more the flood of the thoughts
gushes through us, the more uncontrollable becomes the mind. So
all factors that contribute to the quietening of the mind are to be
cultivated and all sources from which mind gets disturbed are to be
rejected and eliminated.
The Teacher advises that we must reject the objects of the
senses as poison. The sense objects attract the sense organs and
bring stormy agitations into the mind. It is an incontrovertible fact that
around us sense objects are constantly present. There is no space in
the universe that we can escape into where the sense objects are
not present. Hence the beauty of the simile implied here. There are
many poisonous weeds and various kinds of poisons all around us in
life and we cannot run away from them; but we have the liberty to
reject them with our better understanding and to handle them,
whenever necessary, with all careful precautions. Similarly, the
sense objects are to be considered as dangerous poison to the
mental tranquillity and accordingly handle them with great caution.
This process of rejecting the sense objects and not allowing them
to enter us and disturb our mind is technically called in Vedānta as
‘dama’ – sense control. This by itself is not sufficient. Mind, even
from a solitary cave in the Himalayas, can, by its own imagination,
get agitated, all by itself! Mind is to be constantly guarded and
carefully protected from its own inherent sensuality, by inculcating
into it the healthier values of life and thus re-educating the wayward
mind.
These noble disciplines within, which are enumerated as the
healthy values of life are, ‘forgiveness, straight-forwardness,
kindness, cheerfulness and truth’. These are to be regularly lived
and enjoyed as ‘nectar’.
A little thought can convince us how these values can bring calm
and serenity in any boisterous mind. The sense of angry
revengefulness can bring endless disturbances into us, but the
moment we forgive those who have done harm to us, mental calm
prevails. So too, crookedness in our relationship with others can
bring unending tensions to the mind; therefore, straightforwardness
is recommended here as a healthier value of life. So, too, kindness
and a sense of cheerfulness can always bring the mind to poise and
grandeur. Truthfulness meaning intellectual honesty, is an
unavoidable requisite in every spiritual seeker. To think one way and
to feel differently and ultimately to act belying one’s own convictions
is to live a dishonest life which brings disintegration of one’s inner
personality.
Spiritual development and higher meditation are possible only for
a totally integrated inner personality. These five values of life are the
essential nurture and nourishment for the inner spiritual seeker on
his hazardous path to the peaks of his realisation of the infinite Self.
This, however, is the only occasion, when Aṣṭāvakra, throughout
his song, talks of moral values. From a transcendental standpoint,
this Master is pointing out to the student a state of Perfection,
experienced beyond the mind. All values of life and moral injunctions
regulate the mental reactions and physical relationships in the world
of plurality. When the mind is transcended, these values, valid in the
relative planes, can have no more any meaning in the realm of the
universal oneness. It is the Master’s infinite kindness that he
condescends to climb down, from his unapproachable heights of
realisation, to the relative fields, where his disciple now stands,
eagerly questioning the goal and the way.
न  पृ ी  न  जलं  नाि न   वायु  न   वा  भवान्।
एषां  साि णमा ानं  िच ूपं  िव    मु य े॥३॥
na pṛthvī na jalaṁ nāgnirna vāyurdyaurna vā bhavān,
eṣāṁ sākṣiṇamātmānaṁ cidrūpaṁ viddhi muktaye. (3)
न – not; पृ ी  – earth; न – not; जलम्  – water; न – not; अि ः  – fire; न –
not; वायुः  – air;  ौः  – space; न – not; वा – or; भवान्  – you; एषाम्  – of
these; साि णम्  – witness; आ ानम्  – Self; िच ूपम्  – embodiment of
pure Consciousness; िव   – know; मु य े – for the sake of freedom
3. You are neither earth, nor water, nor fire, nor air, nor space. In
order to attain freedom know the Self as the ‘witness’ of all these –
the embodiment of pure Consciousness itself.
The five great elements are the ‘material cause’ with which the gross
physical structure is constructed. The subtle aspects of these five
great elements constitute the mind-intellect equipment in man,
considered in Vedānta as the subtle body. The gross body is the
vehicle through which the subtle body functions in expressing itself
and discovering its whimsical gratifications. The residual vāsanās in
each one of us swell upto express and exhaust themselves. A
vāsanā sprouts first as a desire disturbance in the intellect, which in
the mental zone produces thought-disturbances and they, in their
turn, precipitate, at the body level, as the exhausting activities of the
individual in society. The gross and the subtle equipments precisely
needed by an individual, for the expression of his existing vāsanās,
are fabricated by nature out of these five great elements. Here the
Teacher declares the ultimate Truth that at the exhaustion of the
vāsanās, the subtle and gross bodies have no more any function and
the individualised ego sense awakes itself to rediscover its nature as
the pure infinite Consciousness, the Self.
Aṣṭāvakra thus points to the student what is to be negated in the
first line of the verse. ‘You are not the five elements.’ A mere
negation by itself can take us only into an empty dark pit of ‘non-
existence’ (śūnya). And yet, the negation process is unavoidable as
the individual-ego in the seeker had lived through millenniums and
had repeated the misconceptions that he was the body and the
mind. To complete the process, a positive assertion of our spiritual
nature, as the Self, is necessary. This is being accomplished with the
second line of this verse.
The Teacher advises the student that in order to liberate himself
from the delusory sorrows of the body and the mind, he should come
to experience the Self within. The principle of Consciousness in
everyone of us is the illumining factor that brings into our awareness
all our physical and mental experiences. We are constantly
conscious of our experiences within and without us. In the light of
Consciousness all happenings are brought into our knowledge or our
awareness.
Just as in the light of the sun, the objects of the room become
illuminated for us, in the light of Consciousness our experiences
become vivid to us. Just as the sunlight does not ever get involved
in, or conditioned by, the objects that it illumines, the Consciousness
in us also is ever apart from and unattached to the illusory dance of
the objects outside and to the delusory sport of the rollicking thought-
disturbances inside.
This relationless-relationship of the light of Consciousness with
the world of objects and thoughts is particularly emphasised here to
help the students of meditation. When the Teacher says that we
must ‘realise’ the Self as the ‘witness’ of all the play of the elements,
it provides a technique of meditation for the sincere seekers.
Objectless Consciousness is the nature of the Self; when objects are
not there for the Consciousness to illumine, it cannot be even
indicated by the term ‘Consciousness’. The ultimate Reality is indeed
ever beyond the powers of finite words to express!
At this moment, identifying with the five elements and their
fabrications, we suffer in a world of delusions and imperfections.
Through meditation when we withdraw our identifications with our
gross and subtle bodies, in the inward stillness, the existing vāsanās
get all burnt up, uplifting the meditator into the plain of the pure
Consciousness itself.
A ‘witness’ is one who stands on the footpath, uninvolved in the
happenings on the road – say an accident. The Consciousness is a
‘witness’ in all the life’s experiences, in every individual living
creature. In our ignorance we become so totally involved with the
happenings and get wholly committed to the joys and sorrows of our
body and mind. The moment a seeker rediscovers the realm of the
Self in him, he understands that, as the Self, he is ever as far
removed from the pluralistic world of change and sorrow as the
sunlight is from the daily drama of the world. The illuminator is
always different from the illumined: ‘I am the Self, the Illuminator and
not the illumined.’
To stand as a ‘witness’, detached from all that is happening within
and without us, is one of the most effective early exercises in
meditation. This verse reminds us of the songful declaration in the
Kaivalyopaniṣad.1
 ि े ि ि ि ि ि
यिद  देहं  पृथ  ृ    िचित  िव ा   ित िस।
अधुनैव  सुखी  शा ः  ब मु ो  भिव िस॥४॥
yadi dehaṁ pṛthak-kṛtya citi viśrāmya tiṣṭhasi,
adhunaiva sukhī śāntaḥ bandhamukto bhaviṣyasi. (4)
यिद – if; देहम्  – body; पृथ  ृ    – separating (detaching); िचित – in
Consciousness; िव ा  – resting; ित िस – remain (you); अधुना – now
itself; एव – even; सुखी – happy; शा ः  – peaceful; ब मु ः  – free from
bondage; भिव िस – will be (you)
4. If you detach yourself from the body and abide in Consciousness,
you will at once become happy, peaceful and free from bondage.
Here the student is assured of the final result of utter fulfilment, if he
pursues and accomplishes the path of negation and assertion
prescribed in the previous stanza. Merely withdrawing the body
consciousness is not sufficient. In deep sleep, none of us have
consciousness of our body; yet we have no spiritual experience
therein. Meditation is an attempt to consciously withdraw our
identification with the body, and ‘abide ourselves in Consciousness’.
All spiritual practices are to help us accomplish this steady
equipoise for meditation. The moment one awakes to this state of
Selfhood, the limited ego ends, and naturally, therefore, all
happiness, peace and freedom become his. Unhappiness,
restlessness and bondages are the destinies of the delusory ego.
In Vedānta there are two schools. One believes that freedom
from bondages is possible only after death, when the body falls off.
They believe in Videhamukti. The other school, headed by
Aṣṭāvakra, Śaṅkara and others, declares that the realisation of the
Self is possible even while the saint lives in his body and functions
apparently as any other mortal. This is called Jīvanmukti – Liberation
right now and here, even while living in this body. This Jīvanmukti
state, is being indicated in this verse. The essential import of this
stanza goes through a verse in Yogavāsiṣṭha.2
In fact, Aṣṭāvakra-gītā has laid the foundations and indicated the
path for Māṇḍūkya-kārikā, Yogavāsiṣṭha and such other brilliant
books, that expound the infinite oneness and the ‘Theory of non-
creation’ of the universe (ajātavāda).
There is no harm if we possess things of the world, but it would
be a tragedy if the things of the world possess us. For example, if we
possess wealth, we are free to be rich, but when the wealth
possesses us, we become a slave to our own wealth! It is indeed
perfectly natural that we eat food, but should never allow the food to
eat us!!
If the above is crystal clear to us, let us apply the same logic to
our spiritual life. There is no harm if we possess, handle, drive and
function through our equipments of body, mind and intellect. These
will be the expressions of the freedom of the wise. But in our
ignorance we allow the equipments of experiences to entrap us and
then we are employed to serve them as their slaves – lo! we are
caught up thus to become the miserable ‘ego’ in each one of us!!
The Vedānta sādhanā consists in the ego in each seeker,
revolting against its own thraldom. To assert the clear understanding
that one is not one’s own body, mind and intellect and to come to
experience the nature of the pure Self, is the entire programme to be
accomplished through Vedānta meditation. This entire scheme is
very precisely indicated in this verse.
न    ं  िव ािदको  वण ना मी  ना गोचरः।
अस ोऽिस  िनराकारो  िव सा ी  सुखी  भव॥५॥
na tvaṁ viprādiko varṇo-nāśramī nākṣagocaraḥ,
asaṅgo-'si nirākāro viśva-sākṣī sukhī bhava. (5)
ि ि  
न – not;  म्  – you; िव ािदकः  – Brāhmaṇa or any other; वण ः  – caste; न
– not; आ मी – belonging to any station in life; न – not; अ गोचरः  –
perceivable through the senses; अस ः  – unattached (non-dual); अिस
– are (you); िनराकारः  – formless; िव सा ी – witness of all; सुखी –
happy, भव – be
5. You do not belong to the Brāhmaṇa or any such other caste. Nor
do you belong to any station in life (āśrama). You are not perceivable
by the senses. Unattached, formless and ‘witness’ of all you are, be
happy.
In Hinduism, human personalities are divided into four categories
called ‘castes’. These divisions are essentially based upon the
inherent qualities of the predominant vāsanās in each individual.
Since the pure Self is beyond the vāsanās, it is not conditioned by
any of these categories. Similarly in Hinduism, men living in the
society are considered as belonging to and functioning in different
stations in life. These are called āśramas - student life
(brahmacarya), house-holders’ life (gṛhastha), life of retirement
(vāna-prastha) and life of renunciation (sannyāsa). It is vividly clear
that these āśramas are classifications of the different attitudes of the
growing mind and depend upon mind’s different relationships with
the world around it. In the infinite Self, which is one without a
second, there cannot be any attitudes and relationships and,
therefore, the obligations of the different stations in life cannot bind
the Self.
Neither caste and its duties, nor the different status of social life
and their obligations can ever be predicated of the Self. These are
extremely helpful in the early stages of self-discipline for spiritual
growth, as long as a seeker is still identifying with his mind and body.
As pure Consciousness you are not even perceivable by either the
sense organs or conceivable by the mind or the intellect.3
Thus pure Consciousness, as the illuminator, is completely
detached from the entire world of objects, as the sunlight is
unattached with the world of things and beings, which it daily
illumines. Self is without any form (nirākāra), as It is unconditioned
by anything other than Itself; the Consciousness in us is the ‘witness
of the universe’ (viśva-sākṣī). The idea that the Self is a ‘witness’ is
repeated some four times in this very chapter. The concept of
sarvasākṣī and viśvasākṣī is found in the Śvetāśvatara-upaniṣad4
also, where the Lord is described as the all-encompassing witness
indicating that the Self is a disinterested onlooker upon all the pranks
of the mind and the intellect. The idiom used here reminds us of the
Kaivalya-upaniṣad declaration.5
Contemplating thus, that you are the Self, the formless ‘witness’
of the universe, be happy. The sorrows, the tensions, and the
stresses of the world and its problems, our passions and our lusts,
all end at once and naturally, there is a growing sense of peace and
happiness flooding the bosom of the seeker as he moves towards
the sanctum of the Self.
धमा धम   सुखं  दुः खं  मानसािन  न  ते  िवभो।
न  कता ऽिस  न  भो ाऽिस  मु   एवािस  सव दा॥६॥
dharmādharmao sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ mānasāni na te vibho,
na kartā'si na bhoktā'si mukta evāsi sarvadā. (6)
धम   अधम ः  – virtue and vice; सुखम्  – happiness; दुः खम्  – sorrow;
मानसािन – mental and intellectual; न – not; ते – yours; िवभो – O! all-
pervading one; न – not; कता  – doer; अिस – are (you); न – not; भो ा –
enjoyer; अिस – are (you); मु ः  – free; एव – surely; अिस – are (you);
सव दा – ever
6. Virtue and vice, happiness and sorrow are all attributes of the
mind, not of yourself, O all-pervading one! you are neither the ‘doer’
nor the ‘enjoyer’. Indeed, you are ever free.
So long as the ego exists, it asserts in two ways – in the sense of
‘doership’, and in the sense of ‘enjoyership’. The ego in its
relationship with the outer world maintains a vanity, ‘I am the doer’.
The same ego functioning within the bosom constantly maintains a
vanity, ‘I am the enjoyer’. Both these assertions together constitute
the illusory sense of ego.
Now, this ego, while functioning in the world of objects, pursues
virtues and indulges in vices. As a doer, one cannot but get oneself
involved in actions, both good and bad. Again, the same ego, as an
enjoyer, must necessarily get tossed about in its experiences of
‘happiness and sorrow’. In short, the ego cannot escape the conflicts
created by the pairs of opposites.
Here, the Teacher advises that the conflicts of good and bad and
the struggles for pleasure and against pain, are all in fact evaluation
of the mind and therefore, they belong to the mind only, never are
they yours. You are nothing but the all-pervading Consciousness. As
the pure Self you are ever free from the conflicts and confusions of
your own ego.
Virtue and vice are the evaluations of the intellect, identifying with
which the sense of ‘doership’ is maintained. Happiness and sorrow
are the values of the mind, identifying with which the sense of
‘enjoyership’ is sustained. Thus, identifying with the intellect and the
mind respectively, the sense of ‘doership’ and ‘enjoyership’ gush
forth from us and they, in their confluence, become the ego in us.
When once all its identifications with the intellect and the mind are
ended, the ego disappears to become the blissful Self.
एको    ािस  सव    मु  ायोऽिस  सव दा।
अयमेव  िह  ते  ब ो    ारं  प सीतरम्॥७॥
eko draṣṭāsi sarvasya muktaprāyo'si sarvadā,
ayameva hi te bandho draṣṭāraṁ paśyasītaram. (7)
 ि  
एकः – one;   ा – seer; अिस – are (you); सव    – of all; मु  ायः  –
surely free; अिस – are (you); सव दा – ever; अयम्  – this; एव – alone; िह
– indeed; ते – your; ब ः  – bondage;   ारम्  – the seer; प िस – see
(you); इतरम्  – as another
7. You are the one seer of all, and are surely ever free. Indeed, this
alone is your bondage that you see yourself not as the seer but as
something different.
The Consciousness in me is the light in which my sense organs,
mind and intellect are able to function. These are equipments
through which the seer, the Consciousness, perceives the world of
objects, emotions and thoughts. Thus the Self is the sole seer in me,
experiencing the world through my life. This Self is the one
Consciousness in all bosoms and, therefore, through all sense
organs, mind and intellect in the universe. This one Consciousness
is the sole seer of all perceptions, all emotions and all thoughts in the
universe. This Consciousness you are, ‘That thou art’ (tat tvam asi).
Therefore, you are necessarily ever free.
The only apparent illusion of a bondage under which you are now
suffering is that you recognise yourself not as this universal seer, but
as something different – as the limited ego – conditioned by your
given equipments of experiences.
Self is the only one subject. Everything else belongs to the world
of objects. You are the subject; the world of objects are illusory,
superimposed upon the infinite Self, the subject. Here I am reminded
of the thunderous assertions of the Kaivalyopaniṣad.6
अहं  कत  हंमानमहाकृ  ािहदंिशतः।
नाहं  कत   ित  िव ासामृतं  पी ा  सुखी  भव॥८॥
ahaṁ kartetyahaṁmāna-mahākṛṣṇāhi-daṁśitaḥ,
nāhaṁ karteti viśvāsāmṛtaṁ pītvā sukhī bhava. (8)
   ि ि ि
अहम् – I; कता  – doer; इित – this; अहंमानमहाकृ  ािहदंिशतः  – bitten by
the great black serpent of egoism; न – not; अहम् – I; कता  – doer; इित
– such; िव ासअमृतम् – nectar of faith; पी ा – drinking (you); सुखी –
happy; भव – be
8. You, who have been bitten by the great black serpent of egoism ‘I
am the doer’, please drink the nectar of faith, ‘I am not the doer’, and
be happy.
The sense of ‘doership’ is the arrogant ego expressing in all our
perceptions, feelings and thoughts as ‘I see’, ‘I hear’, ‘I feel’, ‘I think’,
and so on. These false attitudes arise out of our identifications with
our eyes, ears, mind and intellect. Seeing, hearing, feeling and
thinking are really the functions of the eyes, ears, mind or intellect.
As the Self, you are but the illuminator of these functions, which
really belong to the different equipments. To arrogate ‘I am the doer’
is the essence of the ego.
Once this ego starts functioning, we become smitten by the
sense objects, and become polluted by the poison of sensuality. We
become agitated with our passionate urgency to acquire, possess
and enjoy the sense objects. These would bring about our spiritual
annihilation. Hence Aṣṭāvakra compares the ego here with the black
serpent and its poisonous bite.
The only remedy is to de-hypnotise ourselves by consciously
maintaining the wisdom ‘I am not the doer’. This is to be constantly
maintained with ardent faith. This mental assertion is a specific cure
for the poison of ego, and, therefore, it is compared here with nectar,
the life-giving ambrosia.
एको  िवशु बोधोऽहिमित  िन यवि ना।
  ा ा ानगहनं  वीतशोकः  सुखी  भव॥९॥
eko viśuddhabodho'hamiti niścaya-vahninā,
prajvālyājñāna-gahanaṁ vīta-śokaḥ sukhī bhava. (9)
एकः – one; िवशु बोधः – pure Consciousness; अहम् – I; इित – thus;
िन यवि ना – by the fire of certitude;   ा   – having burnt down;
अ ानगहनम् – the forest of ignorance; वीत  शोकः  – discarding all grief
(you); सुखी – happy; भव – be
9. Having thus burnt down the forest of ignorance with the fire of
certitude ‘I am the one pure Consciousness’, and discarding all grief,
be happy.
The non-apprehension of our spiritual nature, indicated in Vedānta
as ‘ignorance’ (ajñāna), is considered here as a ‘forest’ inasmuch as
having gone into a dense forest one is sure to lose one's way therein
and keep wandering within it, until hunger and thirst, exhaustion and
fatigue, reach to destroy him. Just as in the forest, there are
merciless wild beasts of prey, in the dense forest of ignorance, ego
and its passions can pounce upon the wayfarer. This is an efficient
and vivid metaphorical phrase often used in our śāstras.
At this moment the knowledge we gather, through our restless
intellect, is of the world of time and space, and of the various
modifications happening in a web of the cause-effect relationship.
When through sādhanā, the intellect becomes calmer and quieter, it
automatically turns inward to experience therein the dynamic silence
of a spiritual peace.
Such a serene intellect, contemplating subjectively upon the Self
within, is considered by the Vedānta śāstra as the purified intellect. A
clean intellect alone can come to apprehend in meditation, the
infinite Self.
The ‘knowledge’ of the world outside is gathered, for each one of
us, by our sense organs, mind and intellect, only when the
Consciousness in us comes to illumine them. Where Consciousness
is not, as in a block of stone, or a piece of wood, there is no
‘knowledge’; where Consciousness is, ‘knowledge’ also is.
Therefore, Consciousness is often equated with ‘knowledge’. At this
moment our Consciousness is always sullied by the presence of the
objects of our experiences.
Consciousness of objects is the ‘knowledge’ of objects.
Consciousness of objects devoid of all objects would be pure
Consciousness – pure Knowledge (viśuddha bodhaḥ).
On transcending the body-mind equipment, the seeker in
meditation comes to experience ‘I am the one pure Consciousness.’
When a seeker gets himself established in this experience of pure
Consciousness, the ‘fire of the certitude’, declares Aṣṭāvakra, ‘shall
burn down the forest of ignorance’ within the meditator.
Grief is the mental condition when a dear object possessed by it
comes to decay. Joy and grief, happiness and sorrow are all
emotions and sentiments, experienced by the mind. In pure
Consciousness we have transcended the mind and, therefore, we
automatically go beyond all grief. Attaining to this state of the Self,
‘be happy’.
य   िव िमदं  भाित  क  तं  र  ुसप वत्।
आन परमान ः  स  बोध  ं  सुखं  चर॥१०॥
yatra viśvam-idaṁ bhāti kalpitaṁ rajju-sarpavat,
ānanda-paramānandaḥ sa bodhastvaṁ sukhaṁ cara. (10)
य  – that in which; िव म् – universe; इदम् – this; भाित – appears;
क  तम् – imagined; र  ुसप वत – like a snake on a rope; आन परम
आन ः  – Bliss, supreme-Bliss; सः  – that; बोधः  – Consciousness;  म् –
you; सुखम् – happily; चर – live
10. You are that Consciousness, Bliss – supreme Bliss – upon which
this universe appears superimposed, like a snake on a rope. Live
happily as that blissful Consciousness.
In the previous verse, the Teacher has asserted that the student, in
the final essence, is nothing but pure Consciousness. In our
empirical experience, we live every moment of our life, perceiving a
world of objects outside. Subjectively, what about our mind and its
feelings and our intellect and its thoughts? Where did all these come
from? If the pure Consciousness alone is the one Reality, these
vehicles of experiences and their perceptions should be unreal.
From where did the unreal spring from? Can the Real create the
unreal?
In order to explain this illusory world of plurality, the seers of
Vedānta have been giving us an eloquent analogy. In the dim light of
the dusk a rope may be misunderstood as a serpent. The moment
we have the ‘knowledge’ of the rope, the illusion of the serpent
disappears totally. The non-apprehension of the rope gives us the
misapprehension as the serpent, and subsequent fears and sorrows
are all provided by the misapprehensions. Similarly, the non-
apprehensions of our spiritual nature as the pure Self, occasions the
misapprehensions of a subjective and objective world of
experiences. On ‘apprehending’ the Self, the illusory super-
impositions, shall immediately disappear, as the delusion of the
snake ends in the ‘knowledge’ of the rope.
You are this Consciousness of the nature of ‘supreme Bliss’,
confirms Aṣṭāvakra, ‘upon which the world is super-imposed, like a
snake on a rope’. Abiding in this blissful Consciousness, ‘be happy’.
All these verses are extremely helpful to a student who has
started crawling upon the path of meditation. To remember verses
and chant them slowly to ourselves, in some quiet place, with eyes
open and our attention turned into ourselves, shall lift us into
profound heights in subjective reflections (manana). Practice of
manana puts a tiger in the tank of the vehicle of meditation.
 ि ी ो ि ो ि ि
मु ािभमानी  मु ो  िह  ब ो  ब ािभमा िप।
िकं वद ीह  स ेयं  या  मितः  सा  गितभ   वेत्॥११॥
muktābhimānī mukto hi baddho baddhābhimānyapi,
kiṁvadantīha satyeyaṁ yā matiḥ sā gatirbhavet. (11)
मु   अिभमानी – one who considers himself free; मु ः  – is free; िह –
indeed; ब ः  – becomes bound; ब  अिभमानी – one who considers
himself bound; अिप – also; िकं वद ी – proverbial saying; इह – in this
world; स ा – true; इयम् – this; या – as; मितः  – the thought; सा – so;
गितः  – attainment, the goal; भवेत्  – is
11. He who considers himself free becomes free indeed, and he who
considers himself bound remains bound. ‘As one thinks, so one
becomes’, is a proverbial saying in this world and it is indeed quite
true.
yā matiḥ sā gatiḥ - ‘As we think, so we become’ is a famous saying.
If you assert yourself that you are a helpless, weak and desperate
creature of passions and impulses, you cannot grow into the higher
heights of beauty and strength of your personality. On the other hand
to assert our own divine nature constantly and to try to live without
compromising this godly status, is to a seeker the royal path for
gaining self-unfoldment. The Upaniṣads also uphold this thought.7
In the Yogavāsiṣṭha also we find a very similar statement most
emphatically put.8
This is equally true in the spiritual life also, because our apparent
illusion of snake has not brought about any change in the rope,
which is the only reality therein. Similarly, the pure, infinite
Consciousness has never modified Itself, ever into the experiencing
ego, nor into the experienced world of plurality. From the delusion
created vāsanās in us, desires gurgle forth, which express as
thoughts and the thoughts in the mind project the world of
experiences, just as in a dream. Awaker never becomes the
dreamer, but during the delusion apparently he suffers the tragedies
of his dream. At the non-apprehension of the Self, the
misapprehensions of the world and its sorrows rise. By asserting our
nature as the pure, infinite Consciousness, we can come to awake to
this new dimension of Experience Divine.
आ ा  सा ी  िवभुः  पूण   एको  मु ि दि यः ।
अस ो  िन  ृहः  शा ो   मात्  संसारवािनव॥१२॥
ātmā sākṣī vibhuḥ pūrṇa eko muktaścidakriyaḥ,
asaṅgo nispṛhaḥ śānto bhramāt saṁsāravāniva. (12)
आ ा – Self; सा ी – witness; िवभुः  – all-pervasive; पूण ः  – perfect; एकः
– one (non-dual); मु ः  – free; िचत्  – Consciousness; अि यः  –
actionless; अस ः  – unattached; िन  ृहः  – desireless; शा ः  – quiet;
 मात्  – through illusion; संसारवान्  – absorbed in the world; इव – as if
(is)
12. The Self is witness, all-pervading, perfect, non-dual, free,
Consciousness, actionless, unattached, desireless and quiet.
Through illusion, It appears as if It is absorbed in the world.
This verse is a peroration as it were of what has been so far
declared by the transcendental Sage Aṣṭāvakra. You are not the
body, nor the mind; in your spiritual essence you are the pure infinite
Consciousness.
The ultimate Reality, being infinite and eternal, cannot be defined
directly by the finite words. However, the Hindu Masters had evolved
a secret technique of expressing this inexpressible Truth. They
succeeded in defining the Truth by indicating the Supreme through
rich suggestive terms deftly employed. The words, as such, with their
direct meaning do not define the Truth, but they can lift a reflective
mind to the realms of direct experiences. Such illuminating terms are
employed here summarising the great dictum, ‘That thou art’ (tat
tvam asi), which have been so elaborately discussed in all the
previous eleven verses.
The Self is the ‘witness’ (sākṣī) indicating that the
Consciousness, which is the illuminator, is not in any way involved in
what it illumines. This ‘witness’ is ‘all-pervasive’ (vibhuḥ). Just as the
rope is all-pervasive in the illusion of the snake, so too the world of
plurality is pervaded by its substratum, the Reality. The immanence
of the Self in all beings is declared here. It is ‘perfect’ (pūrṇaḥ)
nothing can be added to It, nor can we substract anything from It; It
is ever just as It is. Nothing is added to the post when the ‘ghost’ is
seen; nor do we take anything away from the post when the ghost
vision disappears. The Self is the substratum for all the illusory
names and forms.
This Self is ‘non-dual’ (ekaḥ) and, therefore, ‘ever free’ (muktaḥ).
As ‘Consciousness’ (Cit) It is by Itself ‘actionless’ (akriyaḥ) although
all actions in the cosmos are taking place in It. All movements in the
world can take place only in space, but space by itself has no
movement.
Like space, which allows everything to remain in it, but itself is
not involved with any one of the objects, so too the Self, as
Consciousness, is ‘unattached’ (asaṅgaḥ). In its infinite Perfection, It
has ‘no desires’ (nispṛhaḥ). Desires are the expressions of vāsanās;
the Self as the Consciousness illumines the very vāsanās. In Its
supreme Perfection It has nothing to desire for, other than Itself.
Since there are no desires, there cannot be any thought agitations,
nor any restless activities of the body. Therefore, this great Reality is
indicated by the suggestive term ‘ever quiet’ (śāntaḥ).
A mind that is capable of reflecting upon each one of these ten
suggestive terms, indicating the Self, can, in its totality, get itself
spontaneously pushed into the experience of a voiceless dynamic
void, wherein the Self is directly experienced. This immutable Self
through our illusion appears as if suffering as an ego (jīva) in the
world.
As the perceiver-feeler-thinker entity, the individualised ego, in
everyone of us, gets entrapped in the world of enchantments, within
and without. Thereafter bound to the wheel of karma in order to
exhaust the gathered debris of vāsanās, the ego is driven from body
to body, in an unending circle of birth and death. This is the
involvement in the world (saṁsāravān).
In fact, the Self does not become the ego (jīva). The rope is not
becoming the serpent, the post cannot change itself to be the ghost.
It only appears, (iva) as though, the infinite Consciousness, I, has
become the limited ego, a victim of circumstances and a helpless
flotsam upon the waves of the daily happenings around me.
कू ट थं  बोधम ैतमा ानं  प रभावय।
आभासोऽहं   मं  मु ा  भावं  बा मथा रम्॥१३॥
kūṭasthaṁ bodham-advaitam-ātmānaṁ paribhāvaya,
ābhāso'haṁ bhramaṁ muktvā bhāvaṁ bāhyam-athāntaram. (13)
कू ट थम्  – immutable; बोधम्  – Consciousness; अ ैतम्  – non-dual;
आ ानम्  – Self; प रभावय – meditate upon; आभास – reflection of Self
(ego); अहम्  – I;  मम्  – illusion; मु ा  – having given up; भावम्  –
fluctuations; बा म्  – external; अथ – so also; अ रम्  – internal
13. Having given up all external and internal fluctuations, and the
illusion - ‘I am the reflected Self (ego)’, meditate upon the Self, as
immutable non-dual Consciousness.
Having given ten suggestive arrow marks to indicate the nature of
the Self in the meditator, here, in this verse, Aṣṭāvakra insists that
the student with an undisturbed calm mind should try to give up his
egocentric sense of limitations and meditate upon the already
indicated spiritual ‘centre’ in him as the immutable, non-dual
Consciousness.
This is the only verse in the entire song of Aṣṭāvakra, where the
Ᾱcārya prescribes meditation for the student. Later on, the Teacher
transcends even this position and thunders that the very idea of
meditation is a declaration of one's own sense of imperfection – an
unforgivable sin – against the perfect Self.
A mechanical mental repetition of the qualities of the Self is not
meditation. An intellect that has been soaked with its reflections
upon these suggestive terms must come to a point where it has no
more any doubts to disturb it. And so it halts. When the intellect has
thus reached a state of supreme serenity, if the seeker can hold his
mind in a sense of breathless expectation, alert and vigilant, ready to
experience a spontaneous ‘awakening’, then the individual is at the
highest state of meditative equipoise. This state of utter balance
within and total oblivion of the outer happenings, is indicated here by
the term ‘meditate’ (paribhāvaya).
The term ‘kūṭastha’ employed in the verse is a very suggestive
term, rich in its meanings. The Sanskrit term ‘kūṭa’ has three distinct
meanings: (a) mountain top, (b) mystery, (c) anvil; all these three
meanings are suggested in this term. The Brahman, the Self is (a)
the highest Reality, (b) the mystery behind all the play of māyā and
(c) the one that changes not while everything in the universe gets
changed in contact with It and thus serves like an anvil.
The Self, viewed as the substratum for the whole universe, is
termed in Vedānta śāstras as the 'Brahman' and as expressed
through an individual mind and intellect, it is called as ‘reflection’
(ābhāsaḥ) meaning the ego (jīva).
देहािभमानपाशेन  िचरं  ब ोऽिस  पु क।
बोधोऽहं   ानखड्गेन  ति  ृ    सुखी  भव॥१४॥
dehabhimāna-pāśena ciraṁ baddho'si putraka,
bodho'haṁ jñāna-khaḍgena tanniṣkṛtya sukhī bhava. (14)
देहािभमानपाशेन – by the rope of body consciousness; िचरम्  – long;
ब ः  – bound; अिस – are (you); पु क – dear son; बोधः  – intelligence;
अहम्  – I;  ान  खड्गेन – with the sword of Knowledge; तत्  – that;
िन ृ    – rending asunder; सुखी – happy; भव – be
14. My dear son, you have been bound by the rope of your body-
consciousness. Rend it asunder with the sword of the Knowledge ‘I
am Consciousness’ and be happy.
Recently a Christian priest Rev. George was reconverted into
Hinduism and he was given the new name Śrī Janārdan. That very
afternoon when he was hailed by his name, he ignored and
continued along his way. Even when the person ran to him, tapped
on his shoulders and said, “Excuse me, I hope you are Janārdan.”
The new convert smiled and apologetically exclaimed, “Sorry, you
are mistaken”. Having lived as George for a long number of years,
even though he has gone through the elaborate ceremonies of
conversion and has been told that his new name is Janārdan, it will
yet take time for him to forget his George identity and get established
in his new Janārdan identity.
You have been for trillions of years moving along the path of your
biological evolution, from the unicellular existence, steadily
progressing on to gain this noble human birth and to learn to assert
the human intelligence. In all these long periods of evolution you
have been living the delusion of your ‘body consciousness’.
Naturally, the idea ‘I am the body’ is very strong in you. The deep
paternal anxiety and concern of the Teacher for the student is
indicated here when he addresses the student as ‘dear son’
(putraka).
Having explained to the student the nature of the Reality and
having indicated the path of realising It, now the Teacher can do
nothing more. The delusion is in the student’s mind and none can
help him save himself. He must awake himself to his own real
nature. Therefore, the Teacher with anxious urgency insists, ‘Rend
asunder’ the noose of your body consciousness, in which you are at
this moment caught unaware, by your own spiritual ‘ignorance’. This
can be done only with the sharp sword of one’s own direct realisation
‘I am Consciousness’.
Thus redeem yourself from your own delusion of body and mind.
Get away from the illusory sorrows of life and ‘be happy’. Intuitive
illumination occurs the very instant when ‘ignorance’ is dispelled.
Realising ‘I am the Consciousness’, abide in the Self and ‘be happy’.
िनःस ो  िन  योऽिस    ं    काशो  िनर नः।
अयमेव  िह  ते  ब ः  समािधमनुित िस॥१५॥
niḥsaṅgo niṣkriyo'si tvaṁ svaprakāśo nirañjanaḥ,
ayam-eva hi te bandhaḥ samādhim-anutiṣṭhasi. (15)
िनःस ः  – unattached; िन  यः – actionless; अिस – are;  म्  – you;
  काशः  – self-effulgent; िनर नः  – without taints, (stainless); अयम्  –
this; एव – indeed; िह  – surely; ते – your; ब ः  – bondage; समािधम् –
meditation; अनुित िस – practice
15. You are unattached, actionless, self-effulgent and without any
taints. ‘You practise meditation,’ and this indeed is your bondage.
As the Self, you are unattached with your body-mind equipments
and with their perceived objects or entertained thoughts. The post is
unattached with every part of the ghost. It is the limited, the finite
alone that can act; the Self, being all-pervading and infinite, is ever
‘actionless’ (niṣkriyaḥ). Where will the all-pervading act, as It has no
field other than Itself to act. In Its supreme Perfection It can desire
nothing, and without a desire how can action ever spring forth? As
Consciousness, the Self is ‘self-effulgent’ (sva-prakāśaḥ) and this
light of Consciousness is never dimmed as It is ‘without any taints’
(nirañjanaḥ). Beyond vāsanās, illumining them, revels the pure seat
of Consciousness, the Self and as such It is stainless. The
Consciousness in us illumines for us our gross, subtle and causal
bodies.
The Self is ever free; therefore, It needs no meditation. So long
as we are meditating, there are still traces of the ego in us, which
alone can aspire for the Selfhood and practise meditation. One who
is trying to sleep, so long as he is trying, he is not asleep. Once
having reached sleep, the sleeper is no more trying to sleep. It is
only the waker who can try to gain his sleep state. In the same way,
so long as an individual is meditating, he has not apprehended the
state of pure Consciousness.
Rare indeed are the seers of the calibre of Aṣṭāvakra, who has
the audacity to declare, so openly, that to meditate upon the ever
free and the ever liberated supreme Reality is itself a symptom of the
meditator's state of bondage. The limited alone will strive to reach
the unlimited; the bound and the shackled alone need struggle to
attain Liberation.
To a sincere student of meditation, this verse has a precious
secret suggestion. When all other thoughts have subsided, the mind
and, therefore, the ego survives itself with the subtle vanity, ‘I am
meditating’. Even this idea must be finally given up. So long as one
maintains the awareness that ‘I am trying to sleep’, he cannot enter
the state of sleep. ‘I meditate’ is perhaps the last lingering thought in
almost all the seekers in higher meditation. The moment even this
vanity is given up, ‘the ego completely disappears into the vision of
the Reality’. In short, in the supreme silence of meditation, a seeker
should give up even the idea of ‘doership’ experienced within him, as
‘I am meditating’. This seems to be the mystic import of this direct
advice.
In Yogavāsiṣṭha9 also we read verses indicating the same import.
So too the awareness 'I am the Self’ is never broken in the man
of samādhi. How can then he meditate? Upon what? And why
should he?10
Vasiṣṭha concludes in wonderment.11
 या   ा िमदं  िव ं   िय   ोतं  यथाथ तः।
शु बु   प  ं  मा  गमः   ु िच ताम्॥१६॥
tvayā vyāptam-idaṁ viśvaṁ tvayi protaṁ yathārthataḥ,
śuddha-buddha-svarūpastvaṁ mā gamaḥ kṣudra-cittatām. (16)
 या – by you;  ा म ्  – pervaded; इदम्  – this; िव म्  – universe;  िय –
in you;  ोतम्  – strung or woven (and); यथाथ तः  – really; शु बु   पः
– by nature pure Consciousness;  म्  – you; मा – not; गमः  – attain;
 ु िच ताम्  – petty-mindedness
16. You pervade this universe and this universe is strung or woven
only in you. Really, by nature, you are pure Consciousness. Do not
give way to petty-mindedness.
The material cause of a thing must pervade the thing made out of it.
Mud, the cause, pervades the entire pot made out of mud. The Self –
the Consciousness – from which the world gets projected, must
necessarily pervade the entire universe. Out of the human mind
when a dream gets projected, the mind should pervade the entire
world dreamt by the dreamer. You are this Self; therefore, ‘you
pervade this universe.’
Not only the mind pervades the dreamworld of the dreamer, but
the entire dream is woven into or strung upon the mind. In the mud is
the pot supported and the pot form exists only in the substance of
the pot – the mud. Thus, you, as the Self, carry ‘this universe strung,
or woven, only in yourself’.
Though, the universe thus exists in you and though it has no
existence apart from you, yet, you are not involved in, or in any way
conditioned by the universe; for, as the infinite Self, ‘really, by nature,
you are pure Consciousness’. In Consciousness the ‘subject’ and
‘object’ get woven as the warp and woof of this magnificent tapestry
of the universe.
When you are thus the very substratum of the universe, upon
whom the universe of names and forms is but a delusory projection,
you should not get identified with these misapprehensions and come
to suffer the limitations and sorrows of the little ego. To do so is
mean. Cautions Aṣṭāvakra, ‘Do not give way to petty-mindedness.’
To live, feeling and acting as the limited ego, is unbecoming of your
divine and infinite true nature. There is nothing greater than your
essential spiritual being.
िनरपे ो  िनिव कारो  िनभ रः  शीतलाशयः।
अगाधबु  र ु ो  भव  िच ा वासनः॥१७॥
nirapekṣo nirvikāro nirbharaḥ śītalāśayaḥ,
agādha-buddhir-akṣubdho bhava cinmātra-vāsanaḥ. (17)
िनरपे ः  – unconditioned; िनिव कारः  – changeless; िनभ रः  – dense;
शीतलाशयः  – of cool disposition (serene); अगाधबु  ः  – of profound
intelligence; अ ु ः  – unperturbed ; भव – (you) be; िच ा वासनः  –
desiring of Consciousness alone
17. You are unconditioned, changeless, dense, of profound
intelligence, serene and unperturbed. Desire Consciousness alone.
As pure Consciousness you depend upon nothing (nirapekṣaḥ) you
are unconditioned. Everywhere, at all times, you are full and so the
term used here is ‘dense’ (nirbharaḥ). As a contrast to the burning
passions that constantly agitate the egocentric life, the infinite Self in
Its supreme peace and perfection is ever serene – ‘of cool
disposition’ (śītalāśayaḥ).
This great spiritual centre, Consciousness, is indicated by some
Masters by explaining the conditions under which the Self can be
experienced. Very often this technique is employed in the
Upaniṣads, wherein an adjectival noun, indicating the Self, can in
itself be a discourse upon an exercise in realising the Self. Here the
Self is declared as ‘profound Intelligence – serene and unperturbed’
(agādha buddhiḥ akṣubdhaḥ) meaning, when the intellect is devoid
of all its thought disturbances, the Self, as pure Consciousness,
comes to manifest in a clear and direct experience.
The common advice of all Masters to the seekers is one and the
same: ‘Desire this Consciousness alone.’ (bhava cinmātra vāsanaḥ).
As our desires, so our thoughts; as our thoughts so our experiences.
Desires of world of objects shall create sensuous thoughts and we
shall come to experience the world of plurality. Ardently desire for a
direct apprehension of the pure Consciousness alone; our thoughts
shall be of the divine Self only and we shall come to experience the
great grand Reality of the universe and the life therein.
साकारमनृतं  िव    िनराकारं  तु  िन लम्।
एत  ोपदेशेन  न  पुनभ वस वः॥१८॥
sākāram-anṛtaṁ viddhi nirākāraṁ tu niścalam,
etat-tattvopadeśena na punarbhava-sambhavaḥ. (18)
साकारम्  – that which has form; अनृतम्  – false; िव   – know; िनराकारम्
– the formless; तु – but; िन लम्  – changeless; एतत्  त   उपदेशेन – by
this instruction regarding the Truth; न – not; पुनभ व  स वः  – possibility
of rebirth (is)
18. Know that which has form to be false and the formless to be
changeless. Through this spiritual instruction you shall escape the
possibility of rebirth.
When a sincere seeker tries to practise what has been suggested in
the previous verse, the meditator may meet with a persistent
obstacle at almost every moment of his meditation. He has been
advised in the previous verse that the Self is ‘profound intelligence,
serene and unperturbed’. Yet, in the meditator, thought waves do
rise up continuously to disturb and distract his attention. How is he to
dry up this continuous eruption of mental pictures, drawn from the
past memories or fancied by his faculty of imagination? Here
Aṣṭāvakra very subtly suggests, to the seekers, a technique on how
to hush up the mind and silence the intellect.
The student must have a clear idea of what he is seeking. In
meditation, the student is seeking the Real, in and through his own
mental web, woven by the erratic play of the illusory names and
forms that constitute the unreal. In the mystic literature, ‘that which
remains changeless in the past, present and future’ is the Real, and
‘that which was not and will not be, but apparently seems to exist in
the present’ is the unreal. Thus, the post is ‘real’; the ghost is
‘unreal’. The waking is ‘real’; the dream is ‘unreal’. The ocean is real,
the waves are unreal. The changing world of plurality is the unreal;
the permanent substratum is the Real.
The body, the mind, the intellect and their perceptions, emotions
and thoughts are all constantly changing and therefore, they are
unreal. The Consciousness that illumines their rise, their existence
and their disappearance is permanent and, therefore, is Real.
Having thus a clear notion of what is Real and what is unreal, the
meditator can very easily reject the false, the unreal and aspire to
apprehend the true, the Real. ‘Know that which has form’, meaning
every object of experience, ‘to be false’ and ‘the formless to be the
changeless’, meaning true (Real).
Naturally, therefore, the attention of the meditator is directed,
away from his equipments of experiences, into the pure seat of all
consciousness. When the knowledge of this true nature of the Self
reaches the meditator, his illusory ego and its misapprehension of
the universe shall roll away.
यथैवादश म  थे   प ेऽ ः  प रत ु  सः।
तथैवा  न्  शरीरेऽ ः  प रतः  परमे रः ॥१९॥
yathaivādarśa-madhyasthe rūpe'ntaḥ paritastu saḥ,
tathaivāsmin śarīre'ntaḥ paritaḥ parameśvaraḥ. (19)
यथा – as; एव – just; आदश म  थेे – existing in a mirror;  प े – in an
image; अ ः  - within; प रतः  – without; तु – and; सः  – that (mirror
exists); तथा – so too; एव – just; अ  न्  शरीरे – in this body; अ ः  –
inside; प रतः – outside; परमे रः  – the supreme Lord (exists)
19. Just as a mirror exists inside and outside the image reflected in
it, so the supreme Self exists inside and outside this body.
Although during meditation one meditates upon the spiritual centre
as a point within himself, when he withdraws himself from all the
agitations created by his matter vestures and apprehends this seat
of Consciousness within, he awakes to realise the boundless state of
the infinite Self. The eternal Self, infinite and unconditioned, is ever
present everywhere, both within and without. In fact, the very idea of
inside and outside is only with reference to the meditator's body
awareness. As a matter of fact when you are asleep, what is your
dimension? Where is your location? When the body is not perceived,
the concepts of within and without are no longer valid.
With reference to a room, or a pot, we can qualify space as
space within and space without. But when the pot is broken or the
walls are pulled down, there can be only one all-pervading space.
Similarly, the seeker, so long as he is within his conditionings, he
meditates upon his Self, as the pure Subject within himself. But on
apprehending the Self, he experiences Its all-pervading infinite
nature.
In order to communicate this idea, Aṣṭāvakra uses here a very
original example. The reflection is in the mirror and the mirror
pervades within and outside the reflection caught in it. The reflection
has no existence apart from the mirror. Even when the reflection is
not there, the mirror continues to be. Similarly, reflected in the three
bodies – the gross, the subtle and the causal – the Consciousness
appears to dance to the rhythm of the bodies and this reflection
(ābhāsaḥ), caught in our bosom, is the ego (jīva).
The very existence of the three bodies is brought about by one’s
own illusions. They are superimposed upon the Self by ‘ignorance’.
As the post is within the ghost vision, the Self is within the body.
But the infinite Self, the Consciousness, is within and outside the
individualised ego and its matter wrappings. Just as the reflection
cannot in any way disturb the reflecting medium, so too the Self is
not affected by the superimposition of the equipments, or the
reflection of the ego.
In this eloquent and striking metaphor employed here, the
Teacher in Aṣṭāvakra deliberately employs the word ‘Parmeśvara’
(God) in place of supreme Consciousness. In fact, the individual
(jīva), the universe (jagat) and Lord, the Creator (Īśvara) are all
different manifestations of the same infinite Consciousness.
एकं  सव गतं   ोम  बिहर य था  घटे।
िन ं  िनर रं      सव भूतगणे  तथा॥२०॥
ekaṁ sarvagataṁ vyoma bahir-antar-yathā ghaṭe,
nityaṁ nirantaraṁ brahma sarvabhūtagaṇe tathā. (20)
एकम् – the one and the same; सव गतम् – all-pervading;  ोम – space;
बिहः  – outside; अ ः  – inside (exists); यथा – as; घटे – in a jar; िन म् –
immutable; िनर रम् – all-pervasive;     – Brahman; सव भूतगणे –
exists in all things and beings; तथा – so
20. Just as the same all-pervading space is inside and outside the
jar, so the immutable and all-pervading Brahman exists in all things
and beings.
In the previous verse, with his enchanting metaphor of a reflection
and the mirror, the all-pervasiveness of the Self was indicated and
the transcendence of the Self was established. While, in the present
verse with which the chapter concludes, the immanence of the Self
is being emphasised. In order to communicate this idea Aṣṭāvakra
again employs a very suggestive analogy borrowed from the
Upaniṣads. The all-pervading space exists both inside and outside
every pot. Similarly, the infinite Consciousness is present in the
bosom of every existence – in all things and beings (sarva bhūta
gaṇe).
The pot-space may apparently look as though conditioned by the
pot. There can be less space or more space according to the volume
of the pot; there can also be clean space or dirty space according to
the condition of the pot. But in fact space, as such, can never be
conditioned by the pot that exists only in space. Similarly, the infinite
Consciousness in which all equipments exist and play about,
apparently seems to get conditioned by the individual equipments.
The presence of the Self in all things and beings is emphasised
in this famous and oft-repeated illustration given in Vedānta.
1 na bhūmir-āpo na ca vahnir-asti na cānilo me'sti na cāmbaraṁ ca,
evaṁ viditvā paramātma-rūpaṁ guhāśayaṁ niṣkalam-advitīyam. (23)
samasta-sākṣiṁ sad-asad-vihīnaṁ prayāti śuddhaṁ paramātma-rūpaṁ. (24)
– Kaivalyopaniṣad-23 and 24
2 yadi-sarvaṁ-parityajya-tiṣṭhasyutkrānta-vāsanaḥ,
amunaiva-nimeṣeṇa-tanmukto'si-na-saṁśayaḥ. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-3.66.19
3 In short the Self is not an object, but it is ever the Existence-Knowledge (Sat-
Cit). In Sanskrit akṣi means ‘the eyes,’ but the term ‘akṣa’ is used as a
common noun to indicate the entire set of our instruments of experience – the
sense organs, the mind and the intellect.
4 Śvetāśvatara-upaniṣad – 6.11
5 triṣu dhāmasu yadbhogyaṁ bhoktā bhogaśca yadbhavet,
tebhyo vilakṣaṇaḥ sākṣī cinmātro'haṁ sadāśivaḥ. – Kaivalya-upaniṣad-18
6 apāṇipādo'hamacintyaśaktiḥ paśyāmyacakṣuḥ sa śṛṇomyakarṇaḥ,
ahaṁ vijānāmi viviktarūpo na cāsti vettā mama citsadā'ham.
– Kaivalyopaniṣad-21
7 mana eva manuṣyāṇām kāraṇaṁ bandhamokṣayoḥ.
8 yat cittaṁ tanmayo bhavati puruṣaḥ – Yogavāsiṣṭha
9 sādho-samādhiśabdena-parā-prajñocyate-budhaiḥ,
ajasramambuvahanād-yathā-nadyā-na-rudhyate. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-5.62.9 and
15
10 tathātmajñānahīnātmā-kālo-jñasya-na-labhyate. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-5.62.19
11 sarvagaḥ-sarvadaivātmā-sarvameva-ca-sarvathā,
asamādhirhi-kau'sau-syāt-samādhirapi-kaḥ-smṛtaḥ. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-5.62.24

Chapter – 2
The Marvellous Self
Introduction
All mystic saints when trying to verbalise their experiences of the
transcendental, become mute with wonderment, at the ecstatic
marvel of the very Experience Divine. Even the unusually eloquent
mystics of the Upaniṣads, who have evolved to themselves a sane
vocabulary and an intelligent technique of communication, are often
compelled to employ a stammering diction, punctuated with endless
exclamations!! In this chapter, in many verses, Janaka tumbles
himself through jungles of exclamations!!!
As a student Janaka approaches his Teacher Aṣṭāvakra in the
previous chapter and words springing from Master's bosom, of lived
subjective experience of the Self, have rocketed the student into an
immediate subjective experience of the Reality. The staggering
uniqueness of the experience, and the breathless vividness of his
direct enlightenment, chokes the student and deprives him of his
eloquence.
When a human intellect can understand and comprehend a
happening, it is no more a wonder. The intellect is then satisfied by
its description or explanation. But when we experience something for
which our intellect cannot immediately provide with a logical
explanation, the incomprehensibility of it all makes it a wonder. In
moments of wonderment the intellect is stunned into a bewildering
silence. Hence the Supreme is often indicated by the term ‘wonder of
wonders’ : (atyāścarya mayam devam). We read this term ‘(āścarya)’
employed both in the Gīta and in the Upaniṣads.
In this chapter the ‘joy of realisation’ is expressed in a language
at once fluid and soul stirring. The graphic diction employed here can
stimulate the contemplative faculty in the students of meditation. The
description of the universe, sustained and illumined by the Self, is so
impressive that a sincere reflective mind can readily feel the
extensive cosmos around him as nothing but an insignificant limb of
his own infinite Self! To the little ego, familiar with its meagre selfish
world, such an expansion of its experience within should be a
staggering wonder!
King Janaka, the disciple, in this chapter demonstrates that the
words of the Master have brought into the royal bosom an immediate
enlightenment. All his illusions have been suddenly lifted. The
knowledge-knower-knowable triad has fused to disappear, along with
the ego, into the vision of the infinite tranquillity – the Self. The
description of this merger is made unforgettably vivid, by the striking
examples so dexterously employed by Janaka.
जनक  उवाच
अहो  िनर नः  शा ो  बोधोऽहं   कृ तेः  परः।
एताव महं  कालं  मोहेनैव  िवड  तः॥१॥
janaka uvāca
aho nirañjanaḥ śānto bodho'haṁ prakṛteḥ paraḥ,
etāvantam-ahaṁ kālaṁ mohenaiva viḍambitaḥ. (1)
अहो – O; िनर नः – taintless; शा ः  – serene; बोधः – Consciousness;
अहम् – I (am);  कृ तेः  – of nature; परः – beyond; एताव म्  – so long;
अहम् – I; कालम्  – time, days; मोहेन  – by delusion; एव  – only; िवड  तः
– bewildered
Janaka said :
1. O! I am the taintless, serene, pure Consciousness, and beyond
nature. So long I have spent my days bewildered by delusion.
The student of Realisation is here regretting the pitiable sorrows
through which he had lived for aeons, due to his own delusions that
he is his body and mind. Now he has realised that he is the pure
Consciousness, at once ‘taintless’ because he is beyond the
vāsanās and ‘serene’ because he has transcended the agitation
breeding mind. In fact, he experiences that he is ‘beyond matter’
(prakṛteḥ paraḥ) and is of the nature of pure Consciousness.
The regret is that, for a span of time, rolling back to trillions of
years, in various embodiments, he had, as an individualised ego
continued his dream play of sense pursuits, seeking in them his
satisfaction and happiness and had thus lived in sorrow and pain
because of his own delusions.
We have already described that this ‘delusion’ streams forth from
one’s identifications with one’s body, mind and intellect.
According to the Sāṅkhyan philosophy, the cause for the entire
universe of names and forms is nature (prakṛti); and the Spirit
(Puruṣa) enlivens the inert nature. In his song, Aṣṭāvakra seems to
have no patience with such rational explanations which are all views
of the intellect, not the visions of the Spirit. Aṣṭāvakra recognises the
Self alone as the one ultimate cause for everything and the Self as
Consciousness is the illuminator of both matter (prakṛti) and Spirit
(Puruṣa).
यथा   काशया ेको  देहमेनं  तथा  जगत्।
अतो  मम  जग व मथवा  न  च  िक न॥२॥
yathā prakāśayāmyeko deham-enaṁ tathā jagat,
ato mama jagat-sarvam-athavā na ca kiñcana. (2)
यथा – as;  काशयािम – illumine (I); एकः – the one; देहम् – body; एनम् –
this; तथा – so (also); जगत् – the universe (I reveal); अतः – therefore;
मम – mine; जगत् – the universe; सव म् – all; अथवा – or; न – not; च –
indeed; िक न – anything (mine)
2. I, the One, illumine this body and also reveal this universe.
Therefore, mine is all this universe or indeed nothing is mine.
Established as he is at this moment in Consciousness, Janaka
declares, ‘I am the sole one, who illumines the body and reveals the
universe’. Matter by itself has no light of its own. Matter is to be
illumined by some other 'source' of light. My body, mind and intellect
are equipments, made up of matter. The sense stimuli received by
the mind are again inert matter. If the Consciousness were not in me,
who else would have illumined this panorama of the subject-object
world?
It is in the light of the Consciousness that all perceptions of the
sense organs, all the emotions of the mind and all the thoughts of
the intellect become our experiences. If this principle of
Consciousness were not in the universe, there would have been no
‘knowledge’, everything would have been an empty void, a barren
stretch of non-existence.
With his new found wisdom, the royal Saint Janaka looks around
and concludes that everything of the subjective and the objective
worlds are illumined by Himself, the Consciousness. Thus, from the
relative standpoint meaning, accepting the delusion of pluralistic
phenomenal world, Janaka thunders that He, the Self, is the one that
illumines the entire plurality.
Immediately, he gets himself uplifted into the sanctum of the Self
and from this absolute standpoint, he roars, ‘Or, indeed, nothing is
mine’. Viewed from the non-dual Self there are no worlds of
multiplicity and therefore, ‘nothing is mine’.
The Self as Consciousness (Cit) illumines the plurality; and as
Existence (Sat) is the very substratum for the entire universe.
सशरीरमहो  िव ं  प र    मयाऽधुना।
कु ति त्  कौशलादेव  परमा ा  िवलो ते॥३॥
saśarīram-aho viśvaṁ parityajya mayā'dhunā,
kutaścit kauśalād-eva paramātmā vilokyate. (3)
सशरीरम् – with the body; अहो – O; िव म् – universe; प र    –
abandon; मया – by me; अधुना – now; कु ति त् – through some; कौशलात्
– skill (dexterity); एव – only; परमा ा – supreme Self; िवलो ते – is
apprehended
3. O! having abandoned the universe together with the body, I now
perceive the supreme Self through the dexterity of some Teacher.
If, in the above two verses, the spirit of wonderment was only
whispered between the lines, from here onwards we hear clear open
exclamations of amazement directly spelt out (aho!).
As an ego we are constantly aware of our equipments, the body
and their perceptions, together called the universe. On transcending
the equipments, the fields of experiences are also transcended.
Thus ‘having abandoned the universe together with the body’ the
student reaches not an empty void, but comes to live the dynamics
of the Whole – the Self. Janaka confesses in this verse, ‘I now
perceive the supreme Self’.
Here the term ‘perceive’ should not be understood as experience
of something different from himself. There is no duality as
experiencer and the experienced, when one awakes into the non-
dual Brahman. Yet, the term ‘vision’ (darśana) is often employed to
emphasise the idea that afterwards there cannot be, to the
individualised ego, any traces of doubts regarding the Self. ‘To see’
is to believe; the direct apprehension is an unquestionable authority
in itself.
How then is this ‘vision’ accomplished by the student? Is it
because of the Teacher? Is it because of the study? Is it the result of
his devotion? Is it accomplished through service? How did he
manage to gain this unique experience?
According to the thinkers of Vedānta, the Self cannot be the
'effect' of anything, the 'result' of any special endeavour undertaken.
It is not produced because of sādhanā. The Self is; it ever exists,
same as ever before. It is not caused by anything, inasmuch as
whatever is caused, that necessarily undergoes a change and that
which is changeable is ever perishable. The imperishable Infinite is
ever-present.
Then, does it mean that all spiritual practices are of no avail? Is
religion a belief? Are the different yogas mere deceptions? No. All of
them are necessary in order to de-hypnotise our agitated mind and
riotous intellect. When the thought process slows down and stops,
the mind-intellect is transcended. Then the ego ceases. Where the
illusion of ego is lifted, the Reality is revealed. When the illusion of
the serpent has ended, the rope is seen remaining the same as ever
before.
In this verse, therefore, Janaka in supreme honesty tries to
explain that he has arrived at this marvellous Self-realisation by the
mysterious power, so far unknown, risen out of the cumulative effect
of all his studies and all his practices and he owes his gratitude to all
the Masters of the Upaniṣads and all the Teachers he had served in
his life. Hence, the student here declares: ‘Through the dexterity of
some Teacher’, he has attained to the Self.
The student cannot point out who his teacher is nor can he
honestly pinpoint by what exact practice has he arrived at the gates
of Truth and exploded himself into Its presence. The entire universe
with all its happenings, together is a university educating the ego to
grow and evolve to the ultimate realisation of its essential Reality.
How then can any Man of Wisdom claim any particular teacher as
his sole guide or any particular path as his only way? Lost in
wonderment, the student can only declare that he has come to his
Realisation, in himself, by the dexterity of some Master.
यथा  न  तोयतो  िभ ा र ाः  फे नबुद् बुदाः।
आ नो  न  तथा  िभ ं  िव मा िविनग तम्॥४॥
yathā na toyato bhinnās-taraṅgāḥ phena-budbudāḥ,
ātmano na tathā bhinnaṁ viśvam-ātmavinirgatam. (4)
यथा – as; न – not; तोयतः – from water; िभ ाः – different; तर ाः –
waves; फे नबुद् बुदाः – foam and bubbles; आ नाः – from the Self; न –
not; तथा – similarly; िभ म् – different; िव म् – universe; आ िविनग तम् –
streaming out from the Self
4. As waves, foam and bubbles are not different from the waters, so
the universe, streaming forth from the Self, is not different from the
Self.
In this stupendous experience of the infinite Consciousness where
does the world of matter and energy stand? Janaka explains here
that they have all become one with the infinite Consciousness. But
how? Is this rational to say so? How are we to understand this
declaration? Janaka employs an analogy, to help us intellectually to
evaluate the spiritual experience, which is always trans-intellect. The
material cause is that from which the effects arise and the effects so
risen can never be anything different from the cause. The waves,
foam, bubbles and so on, risen from the waters, can never be
anything other than water itself.
An effect is nothing other than its own cause in another form. The
universe that has stemmed out from the Self, is also nothing different
from It. At the moment of wisdom, when the Self is realised, on
gaining the vision of the Self, the disturbing plurality of the universe
ceases to be. In the understanding that the ocean is an
immeasurable mass of water, the crowd of waves, foams and
bubbles no longer disturb and distract, although they may exist and
play about on the surface of the ocean. The universe is nothing but
the Self, and is never in any way different from It.
त ुमा ो  भवेदेव  पटो  य ि चा रतः।
आ त ा मेवेदं  त ि  ं  िवचा रतम्॥५॥
tantumātro bhaved-eva paṭo yadvad-vicāritaḥ,
ātmatanmātram-evedaṁ tadvad-viśvaṁ vicāritam. (5)
त ुमा ः – thread only; भवेत् – is; एव – certainly; पटः – cloth; य त् – as;
िवचा रतः – analysed; आ त ा म् – nothing but the Self; एव –
certainly; इदम् – this; त त् – even so; िव म् – universe; िवचा रतम् –
examined carefully
5. Just as cloth, when analysed, becomes nothing but thread, even
so this universe, when examined carefully is found to be nothing but
the Self.
The unique visions of the mystic sages are not readily
comprehensible to the seekers in their early stages of study and
practice. And this is as it should be. The vision of the Masters is the
intuitive apprehension of the Reality, when they transcend their
intellects. But the student is rooted in his body consciousness and is
trying to comprehend the Reality with his intellect. Necessarily the
intellectual faculties of logic and reason must stand aghast at the
daring words of the mystic apprehension.
Yet, the function of the scriptures is to help the student to
conceive and understand the Reality as clearly as possible for the
rational comprehension of man. This communication is
accomplished by the scriptural Masters of the world all over, through
the use of effective examples and eloquent analogies, boisterous
metaphors and expressive similes.
Aṣṭāvakra here employs a familiar example of the Upaniṣads.
Ordinarily, in our day-to-day transactions, we use cloth and view
it from its utility standpoint. But a little thoughtful examination can
easily reveal that what we consider as cloth is nothing but threads
woven together. Yet, if you go to a trader in textile goods and
demand a pound of thread, how few of them would really cut a piece
of cloth to the weight of one pound! Every shopkeeper would declare
that he has no thread for sale! In the vision of the cloth, the existence
of the thread is not generally recognised. To see the thread, a little
discriminative thinking is necessary.
In our day-to-day life, we are jostled about by the moment-to-
moment happenings around us and in the laughter and tears of living
through them, we take the world of plurality (viśvam) for its face
value. Here the Ᾱcārya reminds the student that with a little
discrimination, world can be discovered as nothing but the
Consciousness, the Self. ‘A stress in Consciousness’ is a thought. ‘A
continuous stream of thoughts maintained in our bosom’ provides us
with a delusory expression of the mighty and the powerful mind.
Through the mind we see the world of names and forms projected
upon the Consciousness. Thus the perceived objects and the
perceiving equipments are all ‘stresses’ in Consciousness. When
these illusion creating, delusion breeding 'stresses' are relinquished,
through deep meditation, the thoughts cease; the mind is lifted; and
the hallucination of the universe rolls away.
With a little scientific thought the essential reality of the universe
can be detected as the pure Consciousness only.
यथैवे ुरसे    ृ ा  तेन   ा  ैव  शक रा।
तथा  िव ं  मिय    ृ  ं  मया   ा  ं  िनर रम्॥६॥
yathaivekṣurase kḷptā tena vyāptaiva śarkarā,
tathā viśvaṁ mayi kḷptaṁ mayā vyāptaṁ nirantaram. (6)
यथा – as; एव – just; इ ुरसे – in the juice of the sugarcane;   ृ ा  –
produced; तेन – with that (juice);  ा   – pervaded; एव – entirely;
शक रा – sugar; तथा – so; िव म् – the universe; मिय – in me;   ृ म् –
produced; मया – by me;  ा म ् – permeated; िनर रम् – within and
without
6. Just as sugar made from the sugarcane juice is entirely pervaded
by that juice, so the universe, produced in me, is permeated by me,
both within and without.
When an example is used as an analogy, Teachers are compelled to
draw a picture from the finite world which is familiar to the student
but the Infinite can never be fully explained by the finite! Thus, an
analogy can help to explain to us only some aspect of Truth; very
often the same analogy may give us a false impression of Truth, in
some other aspects.
In the example of the cloth, no doubt, it is made up of the thread;
apart from the thread there is no existence for the cloth. But in a
woven cloth there should be microscopic spaces interlacing the
woven tirades that form its warp and woof. The example given in the
above verse, may thus lead the student into a misconception that the
Consciousness exists in the things and beings of the universe, with
lots of interspaces! This would contradict the all-pervasiveness of the
Self. Hence to re-inforce the previous example, the teacher doles out
yet another analogy, in this verse, supplementing the understanding
derived from the previous.
Sugar is made out of the sugarcane juice and the juice pervades
every part of the sugar so crystallised. A sugar crystal is
homogeneous with the sweetness of the juice. ‘Similarly’ indicates
Janaka, ‘I, as the Self, pervade, inside and outside the universe, that
has crystallised in me.’
All the above three verses, through different analogies lift the
student's understanding to comprehend that the world of plurality is
nothing but infinite Consciousness in an apparent state of
disturbance. In reality the world is nothing but the Self alone.
Then, why this experience of the universe? What makes the
world appear? Who creates it? Thus many similar questions are
natural in the bosom of a seeker in the early stages of his study.
They are answered in the following verse.
आ ा ाना ग ाित  आ  ाना   भासते।
र  ानादिहभा ित  त ाना ासते  न  िह॥७॥
ātmājñānājjagad-bhāti ātmajñānānna bhāsate,
rajjvajñānād-ahirbhāti tajjñānād-bhāsate na hi. (7)
आ ा ानात् – from the ‘ignorance’ of the Self; जगत् – the universe;
भाित – appears; आ    ानात् – from the ‘knowledge’ of the Self; न –
not; भासते – appears; र  ुअ ानात् – from the non-apprehension of the
rope; अिहः – serpent; भाित – appears; त  ानात् – from the
apprehension of that; भासते – appears; न – not; िह – indeed
7. The universe appears from the ‘ignorance' of the Self, and
disappears with 'knowledge’ of the Self just as the serpent, indeed,
appears from the 'non-apprehension' of the rope and disappears with
its 'apprehension'.
Supplying the student with an explanation on why the creation of an
illusory world of plurality and how this creation is maintained, we
have here the oft-quoted example, as given in Vedānta, of the rope
and the serpent. When the substratum, the rope, is not cognised, in
this ‘non-apprehension’ (ignorance) of the rope, the restless mind
imagines various ‘misapprehensions’. When the intellect is veiled,
the mind projects. Then the illusion is sustained by the fanciful
imagination of the mind. Thereafter follows all the confusions and
sorrows. When the substratum, the rope, is ‘apprehended’, the ‘non-
apprehension’ of the rope is ended; naturally, therefore, all
‘misapprehensions’ also end.
In our ‘ignorance’ of the Self, the experiencer-experienced
universe (jagat) manifests to supply the confusions and sorrows in
the experiencing-ego. When the miserable ego rediscovers itself to
be nothing other than the pure Self, the plurality merges to disappear
into the one, non-dual Reality.
That Janaka here is employing the example as given in
Upaniṣads, need not necessarily be a mere slavish repetition. The
royal saint in the King Janaka, on realising the Self, has now the
same experience as the saints of the Upaniṣads had in their mystic
moments of their spiritual Realisation. Therefore, there can certainly
be a similarity of expression.
In that case what exactly is my nature as Self? At this moment I
have an identity, a location in space, an expression in time. But once
this ego in me has ended, it would be the total destruction of my
individuality and, thereafter, how do I survive? What would be my
nature? These questions are answered by Janaka, in the following
verse, by defining his own spiritual nature as he directly experiences.
 काशो  मे  िनजं   प ं  नाित र ोऽ हं  ततः।
यदा   काशते  िव ं  तदाऽहंभास  एव  िह॥८॥
prakāśo me nijaṁ rūpaṁ nātirikto'smyahaṁ tataḥ,
yadā prakāśate viśvaṁ tadā'haṁbhāsa eva hi. (8)
 े ि ि  
 काशः – light; मे – my; िनजम् – own;  पम् – nature; न – not; अित र ः
– different; अ   – am; अहम् – I; ततः – from that; यदा – when;  काशते
– manifests; िव म् – universe; तदा – then; अहम् – I; भास – shine; एव –
alone; िह – indeed
8. Light is my very nature; I am nothing other than that Light. When
the universe manifests, indeed, it is I alone who shine.
The life, as Consciousness, brings to our awareness all our
experiences – physical, mental and intellectual. In this sense of the
term, the Upaniṣads very often indicate the Self as 'Light' (Caitanya).
This example is very often taken by the student too literally and in
their overzealous enthusiasm they start imagining in their meditation
that they had seen the Truth as a dazzling ‘mass of light’. Hindu
Teachers, while teaching us the Upaniṣads, take special pains to
remind us that the term ‘Light’ as used here is not ‘light’ as we
experience in the world outside. What we experience can only be an
‘object’ not the ‘Subject’. Śrī Ramakrishna Paramahamsa had once
defined the Reality as ‘Light without its properties’. In Vedānta, the
Self is considered as ‘Light’ because of its essential expression, in all
living beings, as Consciousness.
When the ego is ended, the seeker rediscovers himself to be the
light of Consciousness that illuminates both the subject and its world
of objects, the experiencing ego and the entire field of its
experiences.
Janaka from his own inward experience of this transcendental
Self identifies himself with the infinite Consciousness and declares,
‘Light is my very nature; I am nothing other than that Light.’ This
‘Light’-nature is inexpressible for the human intellect and when this
Consciousness is viewed through our disturbing equipments of the
body, mind and intellect, it is visualised as the world of objects,
emotions and thoughts.
In a cinema theatre, inside the machine room, is the white arc
light which is spread on the entire area of the screen, facing the
audience. But when the film passes in front of the arc light within the
machine room, the audience observes the world of names and forms
and their movements, revealing the theme of the story. In the same
way, the Consciousness within is viewing the Consciousness which
is the substratum of the whole universe, through our equipments
and, therefore, the world picture is perceived.
In short, the universe is nothing but a projection of the effulgent
Self. We are irresistibly reminded of a similar assertion in the
Bhagavad-gītā.1
Ṛṣis of Upaniṣads also are insisting that all that exists, shines
and rejoices are all variegated expressions of the One, Existence-
Knowledge-Bliss, Saccidānanda-Reality. The awareness of the
universe is itself a play of the Awareness.
अहो  िवक  तं  िव म ाना िय  भासते।
   ं  शु ौ  फणी  र ौ  वा र  सूय करे  यथा॥९॥
aho vikalpitaṁ viśvam-ajñānān-mayi bhāsate,
rūpyaṁ śuktau phaṇī rajjau vāri sūryakare yathā. (9)
अहो – O! Marvellous; िवक  तम् – misapprehended; िव म् – the
universe; अ ानात् – through ignorance; मिय – in Me; भासते – appears;
  म ् – silver; शु ौ  – in the mother-of-pearl; फणी – snake; र ौ – in
the rope; वा र – water (so); सूय करे – in the sunlight; यथा – as
9. O Marvellous! The universe appears in Me, misapprehended
through ‘ignorance’ just as silver in the mother-of-pearl, snake in the
rope, and water in the sunlight.
In all the immediately preceding five verses we have been provided
with as many as five different examples to prove, or to indicate, that
the Self is the cause for the universe and as such it pervades all the
things and beings. If a pot is made out of mud, certainly the mud
pervades the pot. But this is possible only because the mud can
undergo modifications.
The changeless Infinite knows no modifications and, therefore,
even to assume that the world of plurality is an effect of the Supreme
– the cause – is to accept the idea that in the Supreme a change had
occurred. That which is changeable, is perishable. Thus, if we accept
this assumption, the entire philosophy would crash into a jumble of
twisted contradictions and logical absurdities!!!
Janaka, here supplies us, in this verse, with another three
famous examples of Vedānta, to indicate that the universe of names
and forms is itself only an apparent illusion projected by the mind of
the observer. Illusion cannot affect the substratum. They appear to
exist only when the substratum is not directly perceived. With the
apprehension of the Reality, the misapprehension ceases to be.
As the silvery shine in a seashell or the vision of the snake on a
rope or as mirage waters, so too the universe is apparently
perceived upon Me, the Self. In my ignorance of the nature of the
Self, I imagine and project the universe and with the discovery of the
Self – with the Realisation that I am the Self – all illusions end.
म ो  िविनग तं  िव ं  म ेव  लयमे ित।
मृिद  कु  ो  जले  वीिचः  कनके  कटकं  यथा॥१०॥
matto vinirgataṁ viśvaṁ mayyeva layameṣyati,
mṛdi kumbho jale vīciḥ kanake kaṭakaṁ yathā. (10)
म ः – from Me; िविनग तम् – had streamed forth; िव म् – the universe;
मिय – in Me; एव – surely; लयम् – dissolution; ए ित – will attain; मृिद –
clay; कु  ः  – pot; जले – in water; वीिचः – wave; कनके  – in gold
(dissolves); कटकम् – bangles; यथा – just as
10. Just as the pot dissolves into clay, the wave into water or the
bangle into gold, so the universe which has streamed forth from Me
will attain dissolution in Me.
When the ghost appears or when the ghost disappears, it cannot be
said that the illusory ghost had reached the post from any distant
definite point in space, nor that the ghost has gone to any destination
in space. It is a delusion and as such it exists only in the imagination
of the observer. In fact, the ghost vision that apparently rose in the
post must be considered as having dissolved back again into the
very same post.
Janaka, numbed with his own sense of wonderment, continues to
verbalise what has happened to him and how his vision of the
universe has ended. Just as the effect merges back into its cause,
similarly the illusion of the subject-object world has, in him, re-
entered to become one with the Self.
अहो  अहं  नमो  म ं  िवनाशो  य   ना    मे।
  ािद  पय    ं  जग ाशेऽिप  ित तः॥११॥
aho ahaṁ namo mahyaṁ vināśo yasya nāsti me,
brahmādi-stamba-paryantaṁ jagannāśe'pi tiṣṭhataḥ. (11)
अहो – O! Marvellous; अहम् – I; नमः – adoration; म म् – to Me; िवनाशः
– destruction; य   – whose; नः – not; अ   – is; मे – My;   ािद
  पय   म् – from the Creator down to a grass blade; जग ाशे – when
there is destruction of the universe; अिप – even; ित तः – existing
11. O! Marvellous am I! Adoration to Myself who knows no decay
and survives even the destruction of the universe, from the Creator
(Brahmā) down to a blade of grass.
From this point starts a set of four verses each an explosive
exclamation over the new found glory and divinity of the essential
Self, which is the one universal Reality that supports the entire flux of
matter in the medium of time and space.
Wonder of wonders! Marvellous am I! To me all adorations (aho
ahaṁ namo mahyaṁ). This seems to be the chorus running all
through the set of four verses here. With the realisation of the Self, It
is recognised as something not merely fantastic, but also as
something divine and beautiful that demands one's own reverence
and adoration.
The absolute Self knows no decay. It serves as the substratum,
upon which the Creator and the created come, play and disappear.
The Supreme ever remains just as It is – unaffected by the illusory
play of the cosmos upon Its serene tranquillity.
‘This infinite Self am I’ is the Realisation. Therefore, in these
verses Janaka uses the first person singular pronoun, he is
identifying himself with the supreme Brahman; the Upaniṣads are
never tired of asserting – ‘The knower of the Brahman becomes
Brahman.’2
Same idea has been couched in a more beautiful style in Varāha-
upaniṣad.3
We find this very same verse repeated in Yogavāsiṣṭha. The
Upaniṣad mantra also says: ‘Adoration for You and for Me, who is
infinite; for Me and for You who is pure Intelligence.’ 4
अहो  अहं  नमो  म मेकोऽहं  देहवानिप।
 िच   ग ा  नाग ा   ा   िव मव  थतः॥१२॥
aho ahaṁ namo mahyam-eko'haṁ dehavānapi,
kvacinna gantā nāgantā vyāpya viśvam-avasthitaḥ. (12)
 ो
अहो – O! Marvellous; अहम् – I; नमः – adoration; म म् – to myself; एकः
– one; अहम् – I; देहवान् – having a body; अिप – even;  िचत् –
anywhere; न – not; ग ा – going; न – not; आग ा - coming;  ा   –
pervading; िव म् – the universe; अव  थतः – existing
12. Marvellous am I! Adoration to Myself, who, though with a body,
am one, who neither go anywhere, nor come from anywhere but
ever abide pervading the universe.
The voiceless wonderment at the revelation of the beauty and glory
of the Self continues to express itself in stammering words from
Janaka, who is pressed down under the weight of his own direct
experience.
My sense organs, mind and intellect can go and come to different
points in space and time and this phenomena of movement was very
familiar to me all through my existence as a limited self. On regaining
the divine state of Selfhood in Me, I have realised that all movements
were in Me and that ‘I neither go to nor come from anywhere.’ I am
ever abiding in My own infinite nature, pervading and penetrating the
entire universe of disturbances which take place in one insignificant
part of Me!!!
अहो  अहं  नमो  म ं  द ो  ना ीह  म मः ।
असं  ृ   शरीरेण  येन  िव ं  िचरं  धृतम्॥१३॥
aho ahaṁ namo mahyaṁ dakṣo nāstīha matsamaḥ,
asaṁspṛśya śarīreṇa yena viśvaṁ ciraṁ dhṛtam. (13)
अहो – O! Marvellous; अहम् – I; नमः – salutations; म म् – to Myself;
द ः  – competent; न – not; अ   – is; इह – in this world; म मः  – like
Me; असं  ृ   – without touching; शरीरेण – with the body; येन – by
whom; िव म् – universe; िचरम् – ever; धृतम् – is held
13. O! Marvellous am I! Salutations to Myself! There is none so
competent in this world as Me, who, am holding the universe
eternally without touching it with My body.
The efficiency and competency that we see among the living
creatures are all expressions of life that enlivens the creatures; and
this is the expression of the Self through the equipment, and as such
the Supreme, conceived as God, is generally indicated as the
omnipotent. Here Janaka points out the marvellous competency in
the infinite Self to uphold this illusory universe of such dynamic
possibilities and yet, there is no actual contact between the unreal
world and the real Self.
This ‘relationless relationship’ is the only relation between the
Real and unreal, between the true and the false. The post supports
the ghost; yet, the post never touches the ghost. The dreamer
suffers, struggles, endures and weeps in his sorrows and tragedies;
yet I, the waker, is not affected by the tragedies of the dreamer in
me.
When we reflect upon this unique relationship, our reverence for
the Self increases. The equipments of experience project their fields
of experiences and create for themselves a world of joy and sorrow,
success and failure, birth and death and in the midst of it all,
unaffected by them, stands the Self. This Self am I; the world play
derives its existence from Me, the Self. Indeed, I am the most
worshipful, the eminently adorable factor in existence.
अहो  अहं  नमो  म ं  य   मे  ना    िक न।
अथवा  य   मे  सव   य ा नसगोचरम्॥१४॥
aho ahaṁ namo mahyaṁ yasya me nāsti kiñcana,
athavā yasya me sarvaṁ yad-vāṅ-manasa-gocaram. (14)
 ो
अहो – O! Marvellous; अहम् – I; नमः – salutations; म म् – to Myself;
य   – whose; मे – My; न – not; अ   – is; िक न – anything; अथवा –
or; य   – whose; मे – My (to that); सव म् – all; यत् - which;
वा नसगोचरम् – is accessible to speech and mind (that)
14. O! Marvellous am I! Prostrations to Myself who have nothing, or
all, that which is accessible to speech and mind, belongs to Me only.
This is the concluding verse of ‘Hymn to the Self’, the spontaneous
offering of Self-prostrations. The Self is the substratum and as such
it can claim that everything in the universe belongs to It. Or, It can, in
Its perfect understanding of the illusoriness of the world of plurality
realise that nothing belongs to It. Identifying with this Self, the Man of
Realisation in the royal-saint, declares in the language of a pleasant
paradox, ‘All belongs to Me or I have nothing.’
The same idea was expressed by Janaka earlier in this chapter
when he said, ‘Mine is all this universe; or, indeed nothing is mine.’
When Janaka says, ‘All that is accessible to speech and mind (vāṅ
manasa gocaram)’ it includes all that can be defined or felt. That
means everything. For wealth of suggestiveness, no language can
stand equal to the Sanskrit idioms.
 ानं   ेयं  तथा   ाता  ि तयं  ना    वा वम्।
अ ाना ाित  य ेदं  सोऽहम    िनर नः॥१५॥
jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ tathā jñātā tritayaṁ nāsti vāstavam,
ajñānād-bhāti yatredaṁ so'ham-asmi nirañjanaḥ. (15)
 ानम् – knowledge;  ेयम् – knowable; तथा – as well as;  ाता – knower;
ि तयम् – the triad; न – not, अ   – is; वा वम् – in fact; अ ानात् –
through ignorance; भाित – appears to exist; य  – where; इदम् – this
(triad); सः – that; अहम् – I; अ   – am; िनर नः – taintless
15. The ‘knowledge,’ the ‘knowable’ and the ‘knower’ – these triple
categories do not in fact exist. I am that taintless Self in which,
through 'ignorance,' this triad appears to exist.
In the relative field of multiplicity, every experience rises up due to
the play of three factors – the experiencer, the experienced, and the
experiencing. Without these three entities ‘I, the knower’ the ‘thing
known’ and the ‘knowledge of the thing’ no perception is possible at
any of the equipments of experience.
When the ego, the ‘experiencer’ is transcended to become the
pure Self, in the infinite expanse of the pure Consciousness, there is
no more the play of this triad. In the taintless Self these triple
categories appear to exist due to the ‘ignorance’ of the nature of the
Self. They are the illusions of the mind when the true Knowledge
does not illumine it. When the seeker realises ‘I am the stainless
Self’, the misconceptions roll away.
When we are dreaming, the dream is sustained by the play of the
dreamer, the dreamworld of objects and the dream experiences.
When the dreamer wakes up, the triple factors that maintained the
dream, all merge back to become the one mind of the waker. The
waking mind projects itself as the dreamer, as his world of objects
and as the knowledge of his own experiences, joyful or sad, pleasant
or terrible, horrible or peaceful. So long as these triple factors were
maintained, the illusion of the dream was sustained. On waking up,
the dream merges into the waking mind, from which it had
apparently got projected. From the plane of ego consciousness,
when the seeker wakes up to the plane of God-consciousness, in the
vivid and direct realisation that ‘I am the Self’, the ego, its world and
its sorrows merge back to become the one, pure, infinite
Consciousness.
In Yogavāsiṣṭha5 we read, ‘Mind dead, desires gone, freed from the
cage of delusion, released from all ego sense, the enlightened one
wakes up into It.’
This supreme state of oneness, where the vision is not clouded
by any disturbing factor is thundered by Śrī Avadhūta Dattātreya in
his Avadhūta-gītā6:
‘In the supreme infinitude of the Self,
No meditator – 
Indeed, in your heart, there is no samādhi,
No meditation – 
In your heart no space outside;
No point of meditation – 
In your heart no time or object.
That I am – 
The blissful immortal Self,
Evenness of feeling – ever,
Like unto the sky –
Untouched, unbound!!’
Such mystic realms of experiences are beyond the
comprehension of finite intellect. Hence the best commentary upon
them is to be discovered through one’s own deep meditation.
 ैतमूलमहो  दुः खं  ना   ा    भेषजम्।
  म ेत  ृषा  सव   एकोऽहं  िच सोऽमलः॥१६॥
dvaita-mūlam-aho duḥkhaṁ nānyat-tasyāsti bheṣajam,
dṛśyam-etanmṛṣā sarvaṁ eko'haṁ cid-raso'malaḥ. (16)
 ैतमूलम् – having duality as root; अहो – O; दुः खम् – misery; न – not;
अ त् – other; त   – of that (misery); अ   – is; भेषजम् – remedy;
  म ् – visible; एतत् – this; मृषा – unreal; सव म् – all; एकः – one; अहम् –
I; िचत् – Consciousness; रसः – Bliss; अमलः – pure
16. O! The root of all misery is the sense of duality. There is no other
remedy for this (misery) except the realisation that all visible objects
of experiences are unreal and that I am the non-dual, pure
Consciousness and Bliss.
Misery, pain or sorrow, are all subjectively nothing but mental states
of disturbances. The more the mental agitations, the more the
sorrow. Quieter the mind, happier the man. These disturbances are
caused by the mind's perceptions of the pluralistic world, both within
itself and outside. All miseries stem forth from the perception of
duality. With the realisation of one's own nature to be pure, non-dual
Consciousness, the world of plurality will be recognised as unreal
and, therefore, it can no longer contribute any miseries to the Man of
Realisation. In fact, there is no other remedy for this continuous
sense of sorrow and misery at the ego plane of Consciousness (na
anyat tasya asti bheṣajam).
बोधमा ोऽहम़  ानादुपािधः  क  तो  मया।
एवं  िवमृशतो  िन ं  िनिव क  े    थितम म॥१७॥
bodhamātro'ham-ajñānād-upādhiḥ kalpito mayā,
evaṁ vimṛśato nityaṁ nirvikalpe sthitirmama. (17)
बोधमा ः – pure Consciousness (am I); अहम् – I; अ़ ानात् – through
ignorance; उपािधः – equipments such as body; क  तः – projected
(imagined); मया – by me; एवम् – in this way; िवमृशतः – reflecting;
िन म् – constantly; िनिव क  े – purged of all mental disturbances;
  थितः – abiding; मम – my
17. I am pure Consciousness. Through 'ignorance' I have projected
my equipments, such as the body, upon the Self. Constantly
reflecting thus I abide in the Self, purged of all mental activities.
Here for the first time, we meet with the significant term ‘nir-vikalpa’
meaning ‘devoid of all imaginations’, suggesting ‘the spiritual state of
thoughtlessness’. This seems to be an original phrase minted in the
inspired bosom of Saint Aṣṭāvakra. Later on, however, Patañjali
popularised it, and Śaṅkara and other Masters had freely employed
it. But it is significant that we meet this phrase neither in major
Upaniṣads, nor even in the Bhagavad-gītā.
It is only when we come to forget our waking state personality
that the dream is ever possible. To reflect constantly that ‘I am the
Consciousness’ and to play with the equipments of experiences in
the constant understanding that ‘they are mere illusory projections
upon Me, the Self is the secret of abiding Myself ever in the supreme
state, without any mental disturbances (nirvikalpa).’ The body, mind
and intellect may be allowed to mingle with and sport among their
objects, emotions and thoughts. As long as the spiritual
understanding is steady, the outer world can never penetrate into the
sanctum of our personality to create even a ripple of disturbance in
our mind.
This state of thoughtlessness is indicated by employing the very
same ‘term’ (nirvikalpa) some six times in this very textbook.
Gauḍapāda’s Kārikā on Māṇḍūkya-upaniṣad, a later work, which
apparently has drawn much of its inspiration from the song of
Aṣṭāvakra, has also liberally employed the term ‘nirvikalpa’ to
indicate 'the final Experience Divine wherein the subject-object
distinction has completely ended.
न  मे  ब ोऽ    मो ो  वा   ा  ः  शा ा  िनरा या।
अहो  मिय    थतं  िव ं  व  ुतो  न  मिय    थतम्॥१८॥
na me bandho'sti mokṣo vā bhrāntiḥ śāntā nirāśrayā,
aho mayi sthitaṁ viśvaṁ vastuto na mayi sthitam. (18)
न – not; मे – My; ब ः  – bondage; अ   – is; मो ः – Liberation; वा – or;
 ा  ः  – illusion; शा ा – has ended; िनरा या - without any support;
अहो – O; मिय – in Me;   थतम् – abides; िव म् – universe; व  ुतः – in
fact; न – not; मिय – in Me;   थतम् – exists
18. I have neither bondage nor freedom. The 'illusion,' having lost its
support, has ended. O! The universe, though it abides in Me, does
not in fact exist in Me.
Early students of Vedānta, who live in poignant awareness of their
imperfections and are acutely sensitive to their slavishness to the
incessant demands of their equipments, are told how they can
realise their freedom from all their bondages. When the student,
through meditation, awakes to the Reality, in the state of pure
Consciousness, there is no meaning to the term 'freedom'; for the
Self is eternally free. In a dream I may experience that I was
suffering confinement in a prison. On waking up, can I congratulate
myself that I have been released? In the same way, having realised
the Self, Janaka declares, ‘I have neither bondages nor freedom.’
The illusory ego has ceased to function in his bosom, because
the sense of ego stems forth from the ignorance of the Self. How can
the ‘ignorance’ continue when the ‘wisdom’ of the Self has dawned?
Last night’s dream, no doubt, played out itself in me, but I, the
waker, is untouched by the experiences of my dreams. In the same
way, Janaka here declares that the universe ‘though it abides in Me,
does not in fact exist in Me.’ From the relative standpoint, when the
Man of Wisdom chooses to look out through his body, mind and
intellect, the world of objects, emotions and thoughts are there for his
experiences; but he ever abides in the Self. When the Man of
Wisdom is in his own pure Self, in the absolute viewpoint, there are
neither the equipments of experiences nor are the fields of
experiences.
सशरीरिमदं  िव ं  न  िकि िदित  िनि तम्।
शु िच ा   आ ा  च  त   न ्  क नाऽधुना॥१९॥
sa-śarīram-idaṁ viśvaṁ na kiñcid-iti niścitam,
śuddha-cinmātra ātmā ca tat-kasmin kalpanā'dhunā. (19)
 ी ि ि ि
सशरीरम् – with the body; इदम् – this; िव म् – universe; न – not; िकि त्
– anything; इित – thus; िनि तम् – known for certain; शु िच ा ः  – pure
Consciousness alone; आ ा – Self; च – and; तत् – so; क  न् – upon
which; क ना – imagination (can stand); अधुना – now
19. I have known, for certain, that the body and the universe are
unsubstantial and that the Self is pure Consciousness alone. So,
now upon what can imaginations stand?
Having awakened to the higher plane of Consciousness Janaka
realises his oneness with the infinite Self (śuddha cin-mātraḥ). A
man when he wakes up, he not only understands that he is the
‘waker’, but this knowledge in him includes the total rejection of his
illusory dream. Similarly, in the Realisation ‘I am the Self’, the
destruction of the illusory ego and its world are inherent and
included. When, thus, one has realised, in his knowledge of the rope,
the total non-existence of the illusory serpent, how can he,
thereafter, imagine the vicious fangs of the murderous serpent
pursuing him? All imaginations are possible only when the illusory
snake is consistently perceived. Similarly, when we perceive the
world, an endless dream of imagination can continuously maintain
the experience of a sorrow ridden world of stormy lusts and surging
passions. Janaka here exclaims, in his new found wisdom and his
spiritual awakening, ‘Upon what can imaginations stand?’ The Man
of Realisation can only act. He will not be ever found to react.
शरीरं   ग  नरकौ  ब मो ौ  भयं  तथा।  
क नामा मेवैतत्  िकं  मे  काय   िचदा नः॥२०॥
śarīraṁ svarga-narakau bandha-mokṣau bhayaṁ tathā,
kalpanā-mātram-evaitat kiṁ me kāryaṁ cidātmanaḥ. (20)
शरीरं – body;  ग  नरकौ – heaven and hell; ब मो ौ – bondage and
freedom; भयम् – fear (anxiety); तथा – as also; क नामा म् – mere
ि े
imagination; एव – surely; एतत् – all this; िकं  – what; मे – My (with
these); काय  – purpose; िचदा नः – whose nature is Consciousness
20. Body, the notions of heaven and hell, bondage and freedom, as
also anxiety – all these are mere imaginations. What purpose have I
with all these – I whose nature is pure Consciousness?
In the previous verse, Janaka despaired that he finds no basis to
build up a fanciful world of imaginations. Here in this verse he
enumerates some of the common imaginations of the spiritual
seekers in religion and philosophy.
The gross, the subtle and the causal bodies are all examples of
our imaginations. They in their turn, feed the imaginations of their
individual world of experiences and objects – the sum total of them
all crystallised, is the fanciful sceptre of the miserable ‘ego’. None of
them can survive in the one, who has become the pure Self.
In the relative field, the human mind and intellect, in terms of joys
and sorrows, imagine states of perfect joys existing in heavens or of
impossible sorrows of a hell. He imagines that he is bound by the
equipments and he strives to free himself by continuous effort. In the
midst of it all he gets strangled with the anxiety for the future,
smothered by fears and crushed by other emotions born out of his
sense of fear.
For all these imaginations, there is no occasion in the bosom of
one who is revelling in the infinite bliss of the supreme Self.
Therefore, the Realised saint in Janaka exclaims: ‘What purpose
have I with all these whiffs of imagination!’ None of these fanciful
factors can pursue and disturb him, who has attained to the state of
the Self. He is ever at rest abiding in his own real nature.
अहो  जनसमूहेऽिप  न   ैतं  प तो  मम।
अर िमव  संवृ ं     रितं  करवा हम्॥२१॥
aho jana-samūhe’pi na dvaitaṁ paśyato mama,
araṇyam-iva saṁvṛttaṁ kva ratiṁ karavāṇyaham. (21)
अहो – O; जनसमूहे – in the crowds of human beings; अिप – even; न –
not;  ैतम् – duality; प तः  – seen; मम – my; अर म् – like a forest; इव
– as if; संवृ म् – become;    – where; रितम् – spirit of attachment;
करवािण – should feel; अहम् – I
21. O Marvellous! I do not find any duality even in the midst of
human crowds. I feel like I am in a forest. Towards what then should
I feel attachment?
In the previous verses Janaka had explained how the universe of
names and forms had rolled away from his perception and he was
established in the experience of the infinite Self. All concepts of the
body, feelings of the mind and judgements of the intellect have now
no place in ‘I, who am the pure Consciousness’.
Naturally, one may wonder what would be the reaction of the Man
of Wisdom in the social living, while he is moving amidst the jostling
crowd of other members of his community. Here is the question
answered by Janaka himself. The plurality is perceived only through
the mind and intellect. When they are transcended, there is no
perceiver to experience the plurality. Janaka living his own real
nature exclaims here: ‘O Marvellous! I find no duality anywhere’.
Even in the midst of the crowds of other human beings, viewed
from the seat of pure Consciousness, he recognises but the one Self
that revels everywhere. The majestic aloneness felt by a wanderer in
a forest is the example Janaka is forced to employ here. Even in a
crowd, at some busy marketplace, he feels undisturbed as though he
is in a deep forest, all alone.
Since he is thus experiencing only the vision of the Self
everywhere, how can attachments to the worldly things ever spring
forth in the bosom of such a Man of Realisation? How can he come
to sport with sense objects? He is ever identified with the divine Self
and all his movements and relationships are his spontaneous play.
नाहं  देहो  न  मे  देहो  जीवो  नाहमहं  िह  िचत्।
अयमेव  िह  मे  ब   आसीद्  या  जीिवते    ृहा॥२२॥
nāhaṁ deho na me deho jīvo nāham-ahaṁ hi cit,
ayam-eva hi me bandha āsīd yā jīvite spṛhā. (22)
न – not; अहम् – I; देहः – body; न – not; मे – my; देहः – body; जीवः – the
finite self; न – not; अहम् – I; अहम् – I; िह – indeed; िचत् –
Consciousness; अयम – this; एव – alone; िह – indeed; मे – my; ब ः  –
bondage; आसीत् – was; या – that; जीिवते – to live;   ृहा – desire
22. I am not the body. Nor have I a body. I am not a being (ego). I
am pure Consciousness. That I had desired to live – this indeed was
my bondage.
Once having reached the state of God-consciousness, the daring
Man of Wisdom in Janaka is, as it were, in this verse, examining
himself as he is and comparing himself with what he was.
As he is in the state of his Selfhood, he realises, ‘I am not this
body’. The term ‘body’ stands for all the three equipments of
experiences. As all-pervading, infinite, unlimited Consciousness,
there cannot be any material adjuncts in the Self.
Nor have I a body – As the Self, Janaka cannot now feel any sense
of attachment with anything. All bodies are in Him, but no bodies are
His. A similar idea has been beautifully expressed in the eloquent
idiom of the Bhagavad- gītā:7 ‘I am not in them, they are in Me’.
Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa repeats the same idea in the Bhagavad-gītā:8
‘This entire world is pervaded by Me in My unmanifested form; all
beings exist in Me, but I do not dwell in them’.
Since, Janaka feels that he is not the body, nor has he a body –
meaning he is not aware of his equipments of experiences and,
therefore, he cannot identify with them and develop any sense of
ego (jīva) in himself and feels, ‘I am pure Consciousness (aham hi
cit).’
If thus, I was the pure infinite Consciousness and I have now
rediscovered my real nature, what was then my sense of bondage
that I suffered in between? Thus enquires the royal saint and he
himself answers that his only bondage was that while living in his
delusion, as an ego, he had a thirst for life; as an ego he desired to
live the joys of the sense gratifications. This alone was the bondage.
When thus, the misconception ended, the ego has dissolved and
disappeared into the vision of the Self.
अहो  भुवनक ोलैिव िच ै ा क्  समु  तम्।
म न महा ोधौ  िच वाते  समु ते॥२३॥
aho bhuvana-kallolair-vicitrairdrāk samutthitam,
mayyananta-mahāmbhodhau cittavāte samudyate. (23)
अहो – O Marvellous; भुवनक ोलैः  – waves of worlds; िविच ैः  – diverse;
 ाक्  – instantly; समु  तम् – are produced; मिय – in me; अन महा ोधौ
– in the limitless ocean; िच वाते – the mental storm; समु ते – when
rises
23. O Marvellous! In the limitless ocean of Me, when mental storms
rise, diverse waves of worlds are instantly produced.
Here we have an enthralling set of three extremely lyrical verses with
which the chapter ends. Aṣṭāvakra dandles his favourite metaphor of
the ocean in these three verses. Waves rise in the ocean due to the
wild winds in the atmosphere, and those waves calm themselves
down to become the ocean when the whistling winds become quiet
and peaceful.
Whenever the mind is quiet, as in deep sleep, there are no
perceptions; the moment we wake up, the mind gets active and with
the agitations of the mind, the pluralistic world rises up into our
awareness.
‘In the limitless ocean of pure Consciousness which is my real
nature’ confesses Janaka ‘when mental storms stir up tumultuous
agitations, mountainous waves are created and they represent the
endless variety of experiences.’ In short, when the mind is calm, the
world of plurality rolls away. In reality there is nothing but the Self.
The world of things and beings is an illusory superimposition
maintained by our mind in agitation.
म न महा ोधौ  िच वाते   शा ित।
अभा ा ीवविणजो  जग ोतो  िवन रः॥२४॥
mayyananta-mahāmbhodhau cittavāte praśāmyati,
abhāgyājjīvavaṇijo jagatpoto vinaśvaraḥ. (24)
मिय – in Me; अन महा ोधौ – in the limitless ocean; िच वाते – the
storms of the mind;  शा ित – ceases; अभा ात् – unfortunately;
जीवविणजः – of the jīva, the trader; जग ोतः – the ship of the universe;
िवन रः – (gets) wrecked and sunk
24. With the calming of the storms of the mind, in the limitless ocean
of Myself, unfortunately for the jīva, the trader, the ship of the
universe gets wrecked and sunk!
The graceful picture of the previous verse is carried on and Janaka
explains that when the ‘storms of the mind are abated, the world of
plurality gets sunk and disappears into the ocean of the Self.’ Here
the poetic fancy suffers a sudden hijacking. The individualised ego
(jīva) is pictured here as a trader who is crossing the seas with all his
merchandise. The ego moves from port to port, transacting business
in the field of worldly experiences, gathering more and more, and
growing ever more rich in his vāsanās.
When the mind is at rest, the ego, his ship, along with his
collected merchandise all get sunk! What is left over is but the
shoreless glory of the infinite Self!
म न महा ोधावा य   जीववीचयः।
उ          खेल     िवश     भावतः॥२५॥
mayyananta-mahāmbhodhāv-āścaryaṁ jīva-vīcayaḥ,
udyanti ghnanti khelanti praviśanti svabhāvataḥ. (25)
मिय – in Me; अन महा ोधौ – in the limitless ocean; आ य  –
wonderful, marvellous; जीववीचयः – the waves of individual Self;
उ    – rise;     – strike each other, jostle about; खेल   – play;
 िवश   – enter (to disappear therein);  भावतः – according to their
nature
25. Wonderful! Marvellous! In Me, the limitless ocean, the waves of
individual selves, according to their nature, rise, jostle about, play for
a time and disappear.
The beauty of this lyrical verse, with which the chapter is concluding,
can ring an echo for a long time in the bosom of the student even
when he has shut the book and finished his studies.
It is not only the worlds that are rising in Me, the Consciousness,
but all other living creatures are also born from the same Self in Me.
In our dreams we all experience the same and on waking up, all the
creations of the dreaming mind get merged with our waking mind.
Just as in a dream, the individuals rise, fight their competitive
existence, play their sensuous games and in the end each die away
in the world, only to be born again, as another wave! When my mind
is at rest, all names and forms must necessarily disappear into the
pure Consciousness, 
the Self.
1 yathā prakāśayatyekaḥ kṛtsnaṁ lokamimaṁ raviḥ,
kṣetraṁ kṣetrī tathā kṛtsnaṁ prakāśayati bhārata. – Bhagavad-gītā-13.33
2 brahmavid brahmaiva bhavati. – Muṇḍakopaniṣad-3.2.9
3 sarvabhūtāntarasthāya nityamuktacidātmane,
pratyak caitanyarūpāya mahyameva namo namaḥ. – Varāha-upaniṣad-2.33
4 Plural subject and singular verb used here is not a grammatical mistake, but
it is used with a deliberate philosophical intention. It pointedly asserts that the
adorable, infinite, pure Intelligence in Me and in You is one and the same.
5 mṛtaṁ-cittaṁ-gatā-tṛṣṇā-prakṣīṇo-mohapañjaraḥ,
nirahaṅkāratā-jātā-jāgratyasmin-prabuddhavān. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-5.81.9
6 dhyātā na te hi hṛdaye na ca te samādhiḥ
dhyānaṁ na te hi hṛdaye na bahiḥ pradeśaḥ,
dhyeyaṁ na ceti hṛdaye na hi vastukālo
jñānāmṛtaṁ samarasaṁ gaganopamo'ham. – Avadhūta-gītā-3.41
7 na tvahaṁ teṣu te mayi. – Bhagavad-gītā-7.12
8 mayā tatamidaṁ sarvaṁ jagadavyaktamūrtinā,
matsthāni sarvabhūtāni na cāham teṣvavasthitaḥ. – Bhagavad-gītā-9.4

Chapter – 3
Self in All – All in Self
Introduction
The declaration of Upaniṣads ‘Brahman am I’ is the ultimate Truth.
Established in this non-dual Self, man comes to experience that the
phenomenal world around him is a meaningless empty illusion. The
fear of death, the pangs of attachment, the fatigue of greed and the
tantrum of passions – all these end with Self-realisation. The Self
glows through him in his life flooding all around Its glory and beauty.
In this chapter Aṣṭāvakra, in a teasing tone, ridicules the royal
King Janaka’s apparent involvement in the functions of his throne, in
spite of his Self-realisation. On transcending the mind, if the Self is
realised and the universe of names and forms has rolled away,
where is the occasion for such a Realised saint to continue the outer
duties of the world? The pomp and show of life, the passions and
excitements of the court, the worries of conducting the state’s
administration and responsibilities of maintaining law and order –
these are unavoidable for a king. From the Self when viewed, the
world is merely an illusion. Therefore, to involve oneself in them
should be considered as a sign of one’s own spiritual ‘ignorance’.
In this line of argument, Aṣṭāvakra tests the depth of Realisation
in his student. In the following chapter, we shall hear Janaka's
spirited answers to all the points raised by his Teacher in his
impeachment of the royal saint of Videha. These two chapters
together read an exciting dialogue, extremely enlightening to the
students of Advaita.
The taunting words of the Master are tipped with sharp ridicule
and they should really wound the student's vanity, if he is not already
fully established in the pure immutable Self!
अ ाव   उवाच
अिवनािशनमा ानमेकं  िव ाय  त तः ।
तवा     धीर   कथमथा ज   ने  रितः॥१॥
aṣṭāvakra uvāca
avināśinam-ātmānam-ekaṁ vijñāya tattvataḥ,
tavātmajñasya dhīrasya katham-arthārjane ratiḥ. (1)
अिवनािशनम् – indestructible; आ ानम्  – Self; एकम् – one; िव ाय –
having known; त तः  – in its true nature; तव – your; आ     –
knower of the Self; धीर  – poised in wisdom; कथम्  – how; अथा ज ने –
in the accumulation of wealth; रितः  – attachment
Aṣṭāvakra said :
1. Having known the Self in its true nature as indestructible and one,
how is it that you, a knower of the Self and one poised in wisdom,
feel passion for the accumulation of wealth?
The Self-realised Saint Janaka continued to administer his kingdom
all through his life. Aṣṭāvakra is, in these taunting verses, ridiculing
the apparent contradiction in Janaka's claimed inner vision and
demonstrated outer actions. Having realised the Self, as the one
indestructible supreme Truth, how can he still continue the vigorous
activity of the world outside, acquiring and spending wealth and
living the political and social responsibilities of a righteous ruler?
 ो ीि ि   ो े
आ ा ानादहो   ीितिव षय मगोचरे।
शु  ेर ानतो  लोभो  यथा  रजतिव मे॥२॥
ātmājñānād-aho prītir-viṣaya-bhrama-gocare,
śukterajñānato lobho yathā rajata-vibhrame. (2)
आ अ ानात्  – from ‘ignorance’ of the Self; अहो – alas;  ीितः  –
attachment; िवषय मगोचरे – in the illusory world of the senses; शु  ेः  –
of the mother-of-pearl; अ ानतः  – from ignorance; लोभः  – greed; यथा –
as; रजत  िव मे – due to illusion of silver
2. Alas! Just as, due to ignorance, a seashell is sought, mistaking it
for silver, even so, due to the ‘ignorance’ of the Self, there is
attachment to the illusory world of the senses.
Amplifying the previous verse Aṣṭāvakra here explains that only in
the ‘ignorance’ of the Self can the deluded ego get fascinated by the
enchanting world of illusory sense objects. If Janaka is a Man of
Realisation, there should not have been in him any fascination for
the world of sense objects. He claims that he is a Man of Self-
realisation. Yet, as a king, he pursues wealth. Is not worldly activities
and service of the society contradictory to the state of Self-
realisation? Only in the non-apprehension of the seashell can one
apprehend a silvery shine, and stoop to pick it up!
To taunt Janaka, Aṣṭāvakra is pointing out that the king's
attachment to the throne and its power are all eloquent symptoms of
his spiritual ‘ignorance’!
िव ं    ु रित  य ेदं  तर ा  इव  सागरे।
सोऽहम ीित  िव ाय  िकं  दीन  इव  धाविस॥३॥
viśvaṁ sphurati yatredaṁ taraṅgā iva sāgare,
so'ham-asmīti vijñāya kiṁ dīna iva dhāvasi. (3)
ि ि
िव म् – universe;   ु रित – arise; य  – where; इदम् – this; तर ाः –
waves; इव – like; सागरे – in the ocean; सः  – that; अहम्  – I; अ   – am;
इित – thus; िव ाय – realising; िकम् – why; दीनः  – a wretched creature;
इव – like; धाविस – you run about
3. Having realised, ‘I am That’, from which the universe arises, like
waves from the sea, why do you run about like a wretched creature?
An individualised ego in its own sense of imperfection generally
desires for the acquisition, possession and enjoyment of other
objects that it perceives in a world of multiplicity that lies spread out
in all directions around it. But having realised that you are essentially
nothing but the pure source of all – Consciousness, the Self in you,
the infinite Self – from which the universes rise, play about and die
away like waves in the ocean, why do you sweat and toil, work and
exert, plan and execute programmes for the service of the world?
Like any other wretched creature drowned in his ignorance, if Janaka
also is driven to feel committed to the activities of the world of
plurality, is there, then, any true ‘wisdom’ in him?
Remember, Aṣṭāvakra is deliberately teasing his disciple to get
out of the student a confirmation of his deepest Realisation.
 ु ाऽिप  शु चैत मा ानं  अितसु रम्।
उप थेऽ  स ंस ो  मािल मिधग ित॥४॥
śrutvā'pi śuddha-caitanyam-ātmānaṁ atisundaram,
upasthe'tyanta-saṁsakto mālinyam-adhigacchati. (4)
 ु ा  – having heard (having experienced); अिप – even; शु   चैत म्  –
pure Consciousness; आ ानम् – Self; अित  सु रम्  – supremely
beautiful; उप थे – in sensuous objects; अ  स ंस ः  – deeply
attached (entangled); मािल म्  – impurity; अिधग ित – attains
4. Even after hearing that the Self is pure Consciousness, supremely
beautiful, how can one yet be deeply entangled in sensuous objects
and thus become impure?
Even to hear and intellectually comprehend the nature of the Self as
the beauty of beauties, the only Reality behind the universe is to
drop all our meaningless fascination for the sense objects of the
illusory world. Having woken up, who will pine over his beautiful
beloved of his own dream? As a king, Janaka is seen in his royal
chambers, surrounded by sense objects, music and dance, wealth
and splendour. Aṣṭāvakara wonders how can a Man of Wisdom ever
get deeply entangled in sense objects? They should generate
disturbing agitations in the mind and make him impure. Lust creates
an extreme body consciousness in the lusty. This must necessarily
bring storms of agitations into the mind. Agitated mind veils the
vision of the Self; thus a sincere seeker must become 'impure' in
contact with sense objects.
सव भूतेषु  चा ानं  सव भूतािन  चा िन।
मुनेजा नत  आ य   मम मनुवत   ते॥५॥
sarva-bhūteṣu cātmānaṁ sarva-bhūtāni cātmani,
muner-jānata āścaryaṁ mamatvam-anuvartate. (5)
सव भूतेषु – in all the beings; च – and; आ ानम्  – Self; सव भूतािन – all the
beings; च – and; आ िन – in the Self; मुनेः  – of the sage; जानतः  –
knowing; आ य म्  – amazing; मम म्  – mineness; अनुवत ते  – continues
(this)
5. This is amazing that the sense of ownership (mineness) should
still continue in the wise men who have realised ‘the Self in all beings
and all beings in the Self’.
The sense of ownership, experienced in the attitude of ‘mine-ness’ in
an ordinary worldly man’s mind, is an expression of his ‘ego’. The
sense of individuality (ego) is experienced, within one's own bosom,
as the ‘I-ness’ and the very same ‘ego’ experienced, in terms of the
objects around it, is the mineness. The combination of this ‘I’ and
‘mine’ is the individuality, which is a product of the ‘ignorance’ of the
nature of the Self.
Sage Aṣṭāvakra, with his tongue in his cheeks, audibly wonders
how a Man of Realisation can still maintain his sense of 'mineness'
to the objects of the world. The suggestion is that Janaka is
continuing to rule over the kingdom of Videha because of his
continued sense of possession to his throne: ‘This kingdom is mine’.
In the following chapter we shall listen to the eloquent self-
defence of the humble disciple, who is being nailed to ‘ignorance’ by
these sharp and sturdy verses.
The vision of Man of Realisation described here, by Aṣṭāvakra in
the first line, is a faithful echo of the Bhagavad-gītā.1
आ  थतः  परमा ैतं  मो ाथ ऽिप   व  थतः।
आ य   कामवशगो  िवकलः  के िलिश या॥६॥
āsthitaḥ paramādvaitaṁ mokṣārthe'pi vyavasthitaḥ,
āścaryaṁ kāmavaśago vikalaḥ keliśikṣayā. (6)
आ  थतः  – abiding; परम  अ ैतं – in the transcendent non-duality;
मो अथ  – for the goal of Liberation; अिप – even;  व  थतः  –fixed;
आ य म्  – strange indeed; कामवशगः  – come under the sway of lust;
िवकलः  – weakened, distraught; के िलिश या – by the sexual habit
6. It is strange indeed, that one abiding in the transcendent non-
duality and set for the goal of Liberation should yet come under the
sway of lust and distraught by his sexual habits.
The smothering hammer of ridicule is mercilessly laid upon the
student, blow after blow, delivered by his Teacher. The humble
student, in utter silence, maintains his inner balance, as he discovers
a deeper assurance in his heart, provided by his own wisdom.
As a king living his normal householder's life, fulfilling his duties
towards his queens, how can Janaka continue living in the palace
when he is abiding within himself in the transcendental non-dual
Self? How can he indulge in sex and derive out of it the normal
pleasure of a man of body-consciousness, when he claims that he is
in a different plane of spiritual experience in himself?
In spite of the hammerings, the spiritual material in the student
survives with its unique temper!
उद् भूतं   ानदुिम  मवधाया ितदुब लः।
आ य   काममाका े त्  कालम मनुि तः॥७॥
udbhūtaṁ jñāna-durmitram-avadhāryātidurbalaḥ,
āścaryaṁ kāmam-ākāṅkṣet kālam-antam-anuśritaḥ. (7)
उद् भूतम्  – the upsurging of (sex);  ानदुिम  म्  – enemy of Knowledge;
अवधाय  – knowing for certain; अितदुब लः  – extremely weak; आ य म्  –
strange and wonderful; कामम्  – sex gratification; आका े त्  – should
desire (this); अ ं  कालम्  – last days; अनुि तः  – approaching
7. Strange it is that knowing sex to be an enemy of Knowledge, even
a man who has grown extremely weak and has reached his last days
should yet desire for sex-gratification!
Evidently Janaka was not a young man when he approached
Aṣṭāvakra. All hungers of the flesh produce storms of restlessness
and agitations in the mind. A restless mind is never available for the
pursuits of the spiritual life. And every spiritual student knows that
sex is an enemy to Knowledge.
If the student is young, at least his youthfulness itself can plead
for him an excuse. But Janaka has grown extremely feeble and has
approached his last days; yet, his life apparently shows that he is still
anxious for his gratifications as he is continuing his life, as a king,
amidst lavish sensuous objects of pleasure. Is this Self-realisation?
Or does it betray an utter spiritual 'ignorance' and base worldly
delusions?
इहामु   िवर    िन ािन िववेिकनः।
आ य   मो काम   मो ादेव  िवभीिषका।८॥
ihāmutra viraktasya nityānitya-vivekinaḥ,
āścaryaṁ mokṣa-kāmasya mokṣādeva vibhīṣikā. (8)
इह  अमु  – in this world and the next; िवर    – who is unattached;
िन   अिन   िववेिकनः  – who discriminates the eternal from the
ephemeral; आ य म्  – strange and wonderful; मो   काम  – of one
who aspires for Liberation; मो ात्  – from the dissolution of the body;
एव – even; िवभीिषका – fear
8. It is strange that one who is unattached to the pleasures of this
world and the next, who discriminates the eternal from the
ephemeral and who aspires for Liberation, should yet fear the
dissolution of the body!
The power of 'ignorance' is so strong that even in a true seeker the
attachment to his body is strong. We may cultivate complete
detachment from all the pleasures and objects of this world or of the
worlds we might visit after our death. We may develop a highly
discriminating intellect to distinguish the Real from the unreal, the
Changeless from the changing. We may maintain in us a burning
aspiration to liberate us from our own clinging entanglements with
our body, mind and intellect.
Yet, in the higher climbs of meditation, the student is jerked out of
his inner equipoise, merely because of his fear to lose his last
lingering hold of attachment with his sense of individuality! This
inherent psychological fear complex is one of the most difficult
obstacles to cross over, on the way to Self-realisation. The love for
the body is natural for every individual and it is out of this love that
the ‘ego’ gathers all its anxieties to supply the body with endless
varieties of sensual pleasures. These cravings and desires
strengthen the body consciousness. The ‘ego’ gets fattened!
Up to this verse, Aṣṭāvakra has teased and taunted his disciple
for the apparent contradictions in Janaka’s superficial habits of living
and in his deep spiritual understanding.
धीर ु  भो मानोऽिप  पी मानोऽिप  सव दा।
आ ानं  के वलं  प न ्  न  तु ित  न  कु  ित॥९॥
dhīrastu bhojyamāno'pi pīḍyamāno'pi sarvadā,
ātmānaṁ kevalaṁ paśyan na tuṣyati na kupyati. (9)
धीरः  – wise person; तु – indeed; भो मानः  – feted and feasted; अिप –
even; पी मानः  – tormented; अिप – even; सव दा – ever; आ ानम्  –
Self; के वलम्  – alone; प न ्  – seeing; न – not; तु ित – is pleased; न –
not; कु  ित – is angry
9. The wise person ever sees the absolute Self and is neither
pleased nor angry, indeed, even when feted and feasted or
tormented.
The Man of Wisdom is established in the infinite Self and as such he
is not agitated by the happenings around him, be he feted and
feasted or be he hunted down and tormented by the world. He meets
his experiences, moment-to-moment, in spontaneity of his quiet
awareness. A Man of Wisdom acts, he never reacts. This ability to
maintain his inner equipoise is gained because of his continuous
experience of the higher plane of Consciousness.
This is considered as a sure test for a Man of Realisation. Life
stories of all the saints and sages of the world bring out this common
salient feature in all of them, their ability to keep an undisturbed
mental tranquillity in them in spite of the most disturbing
environments around them. Their identity is with the Self ‘alone’
(kevalam), in its absolute all-pervading nature, hence their steady
inner peace, always, under all conditions, be they vociferously
congratulated or viciously condemned.
चे मानं  शरीरं    ं  प   शरीरवत्।
सं व े  चािप  िन ायां  कथं   ु  ेत्  महाशयः॥१०॥
ceṣṭamānaṁ śarīraṁ svaṁ paśyatyanya-śarīravat,
saṁstave cāpi nindāyāṁ kathaṁ kṣubhyet mahāśayaḥ. (10)
चे मानम् – acting; शरीरम् – body;  म ्  – his own; प ित – sees (so);
अ शरीरवत्  – like another’s body; सं व े – in praise; च – and; अिप –
even; िन ायाम्  – in blame; कथम्  – how;  ु  ेत्  – should be perturbed;
महाशयः  – a great souled person
10. A great souled person watches his own body acting as if it were
another's. As such, how should he be perturbed by praise or blame?
As the pure Self, he is the Awareness, not only behind perceptions,
emotions and thoughts but also of the very equipments of the body,
mind and intellect. He stands ever as a ‘witness’ of himself, the
subject and its world of experiences. This attitude can be only
demonstrated, if the student can imagine a unique condition wherein
while his dream is continuing, he happens to maintain his waking
consciousness! As a waker he knows that he is dreaming and from
this higher state of Consciousness he could ‘witness’ the dreamer in
him dreaming his own dreamworld, projected by his own
imaginations!!
If the above unique condition could even be intellectually
comprehended, students of Vedānta can gain at least a dim concept
of the vision of the world as perceived by a Man of Wisdom from his
fully awakened inner state of absolute Bliss. To such a wise man
how can the worldly praise or the clamorous criticism of the
blabbering crowd ever bring any restlessness to disturb his serene
bosom?
In these verses Aṣṭāvakra is enumerating the attitudes and
behaviours of a Man of Perfection. In fact, the theme in the song of
Aṣṭāvakra is the glory of the Man of Perfection – a hymn to the God-
man – playing in the finite world, amidst its crowds of miserable
mortal entities.
मायामा िमदं  िव ं  प न ्  िवगतकौतुकः।
अिप  सि िहते  मृ ौ  कथं    ित  धीरधीः॥११॥
māyā-mātram-idaṁ viśvaṁ paśyan vigata-kautukaḥ,
api sannihite mṛtyau kathaṁ trasyati dhīradhīḥ. (11)
मायामा  – mere illusion; इदम् – this; िव म्  – universe; प न ्  – seeing;
िवगतकौतुकः  – all zest gone; अिप – even; सि िहते  – approaching; मृ ौ
– in the death; कथम् – how;   ित  – fears; धीरधीः – a man of poised
intellect
11. Realising this universe as a mere illusion and having lost all zest
in life, how can even such a man of poised intellect fear the
approach of death?
‘The zest to live’, here means the continuous hunger to seek
happiness and fulfilment in sense gratifications, which is the
continuous motive force which propels the individual entities to
continue the race. From the womb to the tomb, individuals are
goaded to move through the ups and downs of life’s paths, tantalised
by the empty hope that they would ultimately find complete
happiness, in the immediately following set of experiences, although
they realise that they have been completely cheated by the world till
their present moment! A Man of Wisdom in his newly awakened
inner Consciousness realises the universe as a mere illusion
projected by his own mind and, naturally, this self-defeating ‘zest in
life’ is totally lost for him.
The fascinating objects outside alone bring all the storms that
disturb the mental tranquillity and the intellectual equipoise in man. A
man reinforced with this great wisdom of the Self, becomes
impervious to all such worldly agitations. Even the approaching
death can have no fear for him! Death is only the end of the body,
the destruction of the perishable; the saint has realised that he is the
deathless, imperishable Self. Hence, he is not threatened even by
the approaching challenge of death.
िनः  ृहं  मानसं  य   नैरा  ेऽिप  महा नः।
त ा  ानतृ    तुलना  के न  जायते॥१२॥
niḥspṛhaṁ mānasaṁ yasya nairāśye'pi mahātmanaḥ,
tasyātmajñāna-tṛptasya tulanā kena jāyate. (12)
िनः  ृहम् – free from desires; मानसम्  – mind; य   – whose; नैरा  े – in
frustration; अिप – even; महा नः  – great sage; त   – that;
आ  ानतृ    – contented in Self-knowledge; तुलना – comparison;
के न – with whom; जायते – can be
12. With whom can we compare that great sage, whose mind is free
from desires; who, even in his frustration experiences contentment in
his Self-knowledge?
Human mind works under a uniform pattern of behaviours
everywhere. It perceives an object and discovers for itself a great
sense of fulfilment in possessing that object and in enjoying it. Thus
a desire is born. This desire goads him on to struggle hard to gain
the object of the desire. The desirable objects are few in number and
the desiring minds are always many. Naturally, that vast majority
must necessarily get disappointed, because all cannot possess the
same object. When the desire is not fulfilled, the sorrows of
disappointment rise in the mind; sometimes the desire is fulfilled, but
the object possessed after a very great struggle, may not provide the
expected happiness and, therefore, the mind suffers a sense of
disillusionment. The emotions of disappointment and disillusionment
together constitute the ‘sense of frustration’. Repeated waves of
frustrating experiences together build up the sad and sorrowful
worldly life (saṁsāra). This is the dissection of an average
individualised mind.
The Man of Realisation, whose mind is calm and serene even in
the midst of great disappointment in life, is a unique phenomenon
and, therefore, Aṣṭāvakra exclaims, ‘With whom can we compare a
great souled one!’ Such exclamations we find sprinkled all over in
the textbooks that expound the goal and the way of realisation as
described in Vedānta. In Yogavāsiṣṭha we read, ‘The great sage who
has snapped asunder all the bonds of his heart, cannot be compared
even with hundreds of lakhs of trinities.’2
The term ‘nairāśye’ translated here as ‘frustration’ is employed,
though rarely, in our scriptures in the sense of the ‘state of
desirelessness’ and so it implies ‘Liberation’. In this sense, the
stanza would mean ‘He whose mind has lost even its desire for
Liberation’.
 भावादेव  जानानो    म ेत   िक न।
इदं   ा िमदं   ा  ं  स  िकं  प ित  धीरधीः॥१३॥
svabhāvād-eva jānāno dṛśyam-etanna kiñcana,
idaṁ grāhyam-idaṁ tyājyaṁ sa kiṁ paśyati dhīradhīḥ. (13)
 भावात्  – in its own nature; एव – indeed; जानानः  – knowing (this);
  म ् – perceived world; एतत्  – this; न – not; िक न – anything; इदम्  –
this;  ा म्  – acceptable; इदम्  – this;  ा म ् – rejectable; सः  – that;
िकम् – why; प ित – sees; धीरधीः  – man of poised intellect
13. Why should that wise minded man, who knows that the
perceived world in its own nature, has no substance, consider one
thing acceptable and another unacceptable?
He who has awakened to the higher plane of Consciousness, to him,
from his eminence, the illusory world of objects is already lifted. It is
only the individualised ego perceiving the world of plurality, through
its intellect, evaluates each object as pleasant and unpleasant and
on the basis of it, rejects or accepts the available field in front of it.
All these processes are possible only under an assumption that the
perceived world is real.
Man of Wisdom also sees the world of objects, but this viewing
the objects is distinctly different from the ways of the worldly man.
We view the scenes around us through the web of our own vāsanās
and, therefore, we cannot hold ourselves back from our utilitarian
point of view! The Man of Perfection perceives the world without
rejecting or accepting it and, in fact, he sees things as they are and
not as interpreted by his own vāsanās.
Having recognised a seashell, as it is, who will stoop down to
pick it up, even though, it may continue shining as a piece of silver?
In Mahopaniṣad we find a similar sentiment expressed in a lyrical
verse. In the eternal homogeneous Brahman, which is the
substratum, the illusions created by imagination can have no
existence. It remains the same as ever before, here and there, the
same. May you be therefore ever calm and serene:’3
अ   कषाय   िन       िनरािशषः।
य  यागतो  भोगो  न  दुः खाय  न  तु ये॥१४॥
antastyakta-kaṣāyasya nirdvandvasya nirāśiṣaḥ,
yadṛcchayāgato bhogo na duḥkhāya na tuṣṭaye. (14)
अ ः   कषाय   – one who has given up all worldly passions from
the mind; िनर् -       – who is beyond the pairs of opposites; िनरािशषः
– of one who is free from desires; य  या – unexpectedly; आगतः  –
which has reached; भोगः  – objects of enjoyment; न – not; दुः खाय – for
pain; न – not; तु ये – for pleasure
14. He who has given up all worldly passions from his mind, who is
beyond the pairs of opposites and who is free from desires, to him
objects of enjoyment, unexpectedly reaching him, can cause neither
pleasure nor pain.
The subtle impulses and urgencies, dwelling in the depth of a man's
personality, that ultimately determine the emotional and the
intellectual profile of that individual, are called vāsanās. These subtle
impressions colour our vision of the world around and compel us to
divide the perceived realm into two categories, the conducive and
the non-conducive. Thereafter, the individual starts his flight away
from the non-conducive, in search of and pursuing the conducive
objects.
In the bargain, the mind is molested, tossed about and shattered
by the pairs of opposites, joy and sorrow, success and failure, heat
and cold and a thousand such other varieties. The Man of Perfection
is one, who has conquered all his vāsanās and, therefore, he no
more comes under the tyranny of his mind and its inherent mischiefs.
Dehypnotising thus from the enchantments of the sense objects, he
lives, deriving his satisfaction and fulfilment in the Self and,
therefore, any object of experience that reaches him accidentally, be
it good or bad, can cause in him neither a great pleasure nor a
terrible pain. No object of the world gained can add to his absolute
Bliss, nor can the loss of any objects reduce his infinite Bliss.
A Man of Wisdom is ever rooted in the infinite Bliss, which is the
nature of his own Self. He lives in the world, but he is never of the
world.
1 sarvabhūtasthamātmānaṁ sarvabhūtāni cātmani,
īkṣate yogayuktātmā sarvatra samadarśanaḥ. – Bhagavad-gītā-6.29
2 vitatatā hṛdayasya mahāmateḥ hariharābjajalakṣaśatairapi,
tulanameti na… – Yogavāsiṣṭha-2.17.50
3 tate brahmaghane nitye sambhavanti na kalpitāḥ, ….
yadastīha tadevāsti vijvaro bhava sarvadā, – Mahopaniṣad-6.13 & 14

Chapter – 4
Glory of Realisation
Introduction
This chapter is the eloquent defence, pleading ‘not guilty’, by the
King Janaka. All the taunting criticisms of the king’s behaviour made
by his Teacher Aṣṭāvakra are satisfactorily explained and vividly
clarified.
One who has realised the Self in him to be the Self everywhere
understands the universe as Himself and Himself as the Lord of the
universe. He lives thereafter in perfection and freedom, fearless and
ever blissful. Such a magnificent soul can never be compared with
the ignorant individuals, who live upon the surface of the world,
dragging themselves through life like miserable beasts of burden –
each a sad victim of his lusts and inhibitions, mercilessly weighed
down by the loads of his fears and miseries!
The entire universe is but one's own essential form; one is not
separate from it. An individual is not built as a sewing machine or a
tape recorder! An individual cannot come into being by assembling
his parts; by welding a head to the trunk, by connecting the brain to
the heart, by screwing in a liver and so on. The head, the brain, the
heart, the liver are different names, but not separate ‘events’.
Similarly, an individual is separate from the universe only in name. In
fact you are not only an essential part of the universe, but you are
the very being of the universe, just as the heart or the liver, is not a
part of you, but an essential aspect of the whole.
When this oneness with the universe is not realised, you are
fooled by your own name! Hence, the ṛṣis had described this
hallucination, called the jagat, as a mere bundle of names and forms.
All fears arise from the dreadful sense of alienation from the world;
on realising that you are the infinite Self, there is no more any sense
of alienation. To realise that I am the Self is to recognise at once that
the society and the world are but extensions of my own mind and
body.
Space is not contaminated by the things existing in it, nor by the
movements and activities that are taking place therein. The objects
of pleasure around and the activities of the body among them,
cannot in any way affect the pure Self with which the Man of
Realisation has discovered his complete identity. The subtler is not
conditioned by the grosser.
जनक  उवाच
ह ा     धीर   खेलतो  भोगलीलया।
न  िह  संसारवाहीकै मू   ढैः  सह  समानता॥१॥
janaka uvāca
hantātmajñasya dhīrasya khelato bhogalīlayā,
na hi saṁsāra-vāhīkair-mūḍhaiḥ saha samānatā. (1)
ह  – O! marvel; आ     – of the knower of the Self; धीर  – the
man of understanding; खेलतः  – playing; भोगलीलया – with the sport of
life, the game of enjoyment; न – not; िह – indeed; संसार  वाहीकै ः  – a
beast of burden of the world; मूढैः  – deluded; सह – with; समानता –
similarity
Janaka said:
1. O marvel! The man of understanding, the knower of the Self, who
plays the sport of life, has no comparison with the deluded beasts of
burden of the world.
In the very opening verse Janaka crystallises all his defences into
this pithy statement. The behaviour of Man of Perfection in the world
outside at his body level should not be compared with those of the
ordinary people, who drag themselves through life as beasts of
burden, carrying the loads of their vāsanās, panting in exhaustion,
desiring to graze on sense gratifications, here and there, along its
bridle path.
One whose identity has been firmly established in the higher
Consciousness, he, thereafter, with his body, mind and intellect only
‘plays the sport of life’. To play is natural for a child, and if you ask
children at play why they are playing, they are at a loss how to
answer such a ridiculous question? Play (līlā) cannot be any longer a
play if it is played for a purpose to achieve a profit. Sport is a natural
explosion of one's inherent energy free and spontaneous. Play itself
is its own fulfilment. It is in this spirit that a Man of Perfection exists
in all fields of his endeavour, apparently functioning as any other
man in the world.
The difference between a worldly man of passions and a God-
man of inner peace is not in the type of actions they perform but in
the conscious understanding with which they enter their fields of
actions. The idle crowds of unintelligent onlookers are not generally
subtle enough in their perceptions to recognise this significant
distinction between the selfish man of ignorance and selfless Man of
Wisdom.
In short, Janaka defends himself with the plea that his actions
should not be measured with the same yardstick that is applied in
measuring the size of worldly beings.
The same idea is found thundered in the Annapūrṇopaniṣad: ‘A
man who has liberated himself completely from his inner
attachments, whose thoughts are ever pure and sweet, such a man
whether he undertakes action or not, there can never be in his
bosom, at any time, under any circumstances, the sense of doership
or enjoyership.’1
य दं   े वो  दीनाः  श ा ाः  सव देवताः।
अहो  त     थतो  योगी  न  हष मुपग ित॥२॥
yat-padaṁ prepsavo dīnāḥ śakrādyāḥ sarva-devatāḥ,
aho tatra sthito yogī na harṣam-upagacchati. (2)
यत् - पदम् – which state;  े वः  – hankering after; दीनाः  – unhappy;
श ा ाः  – beginning with Indra; सव देवताः  – all gods; अहो – O! marvel;
त  – there;   थतः  – abiding; योगी – yogin; न – not; हष म्  – elation;
उपग ित – attains
2. O marvel! The yogin does not feel elated abiding in that state
which Indra and others hanker after and become unhappy (because
they cannot attain it).
The happiness and bliss experienced by a Man of Perfection is from
the blissful Self. It is this state of perfect happiness that the gods and
their king, Indra, are seeking in the subtle sensuous fields of the
heavens! They feel disappointed and cheated because of the
inherent imperfections in the completeness of even the heavenly
sense objects.
In this state of absolute Bliss also, the Man of Wisdom cannot be
considered as fully elated, because it is his own nature and there is
no subject to experience this source of all Bliss. In deep sleep, the
sleeper is not separate from the sleep.
Janaka here points out from his own deep inner sense of
fulfilment and bliss in the experience of the Self. In view of this
complete satisfaction, ever lived within, why should he get himself
involved in the apparent sensuous fields of pleasures available in his
palace? How then can the responsibilities of the throne ever distract
him?
त    पु पापा ा ं   श     न    जायते।
न   ाकाश   धूमेन    मानाऽिप  स ितः॥३॥
tajjñasya puṇya-pāpābhyāṁ sparśo hyantarna jāyate,
na hyākāśasya dhūmena dṛśyamānā'pi saṅgatiḥ. (3)
त    – of one who has comprehended That; पु पापा ाम् – with
virtue and vice;  श  ः  – touch; िह – indeed; अ ः  – of inside; न – not;
जायते  – exists; न – not; िह – just as; आकाश  – of the space; धूमेन –
with smoke;   माना – apparently; अिप – though; स ितः  – contact
3. Indeed, the heart of one who has comprehended the Self is not
touched by virtue and vice, just as the space is uncontaminated by
smoke even though apparently it exists in space.
Dust, smoke, clouds and so on remain hung up in space and yet,
because of its greater subtlety, it is not contaminated by the
existence of these. In the same way, virtue and vice cannot affect
one who has comprehended the Self and has come to identify
himself with this all-pervading Consciousness. Virtue and vice are
the negative and positive vāsanās, which create healthy and
unhealthy thought currents, which again become the very propelling
force behind all good and bad actions. A Man of Wisdom is one who
has withdrawn himself from all material equipments and as such he
is ever beyond even the vāsanās.
The royal activities and their anxieties, the court and its
pleasures, the throne and its responsibilities, all are apparently
around the saintly king, but none of them can affect his deep spiritual
wisdom, just as space is not contaminated by the dust or smoke that
is held suspended in it.
 ै े   े
आ ैवेदं  जग व    ातं  येन  महा ना।
य  या  वत मानं  तं  िनषेद् धुं   मेत  कः॥४॥
ātmaivedaṁ jagat-sarvaṁ jñātaṁ yena mahātmanā,
yadṛcchayā vartamānaṁ taṁ niṣeddhuṁ kṣameta kaḥ. (4)
आ ा – Self; एव – alone; इदम्  – this; जगत्  – universe; सव म् – all;  ातम्
– is known; येन – by whom; महा ना – the wise man; य  या – as he
likes (spontaneously); वत मानम् – remaining; तम् – him; िनषेद् धुम् –
prohibit;  मेत – can; कः  – who
4. The wise man, who has known this entire universe to be the Self
alone, acts spontaneously. Who can forbid him?
Even the Vedas dare not prescribe do’s and don'ts to such a Man of
Realisation. In fact, the Vaidika injunctions are records of the
observed behaviours and attitudes of such Men of Realisation.
The freedom has been allowed to a Man of Perfection by
scriptures only because, in his transcendence, his ego has
completely ended, and therefore, he has been rendered
incapacitated to act wrongly or to think ever viciously! Just as a great
musician cannot go wrong in his time and tune, just as a great
dancer can never go wrong in her steps, so too, a Man of Perfection
cannot step out from the righteous path. His actions might be
misunderstood by his generation. How can the beasts of burden,
panting with their instinctive activities, understand the harmony and
rhythm in the bosom of the Perfect?
In Mahābhārata (Śukāṣṭakam) Śukadeva himself says: ‘One in
whom all the sense of distinctions has ended; concepts of virtue and
vice have rotted away; māyā and its delusions have been lifted; all
doubts have ceased; one who dwells beyond words and is without
three qualities; who has awakened to the Reality; ever after moving
on the path of egolessness; to him who can prescribe what he must
do and what he should not do?’2
   े े ि  े
आ    पय    े  भूत ामे  चतुिव धे।
िव   ैव  िह  साम    िम ािन ािववज ने॥५॥
ābrahma-stamba-paryante bhūta-grāme caturvidhe,
vijñasyaiva hi sāmarthyam-icchānicchā-vivarjane. (5)
आ        पय   े – from Brahmā down to a grass blade; भूत ामे – in
all beings; चतुिव धे – of the four categories of existence; िव    – the
wise one; एव – alone; िह – indeed; साम  म् – capacity; इ ा  अिन ा
िववज   ने – in renouncing desires and aversions
5. Of the four categories of existence, from Brahmā down to a grass
blade, it is the wise one alone who has the capacity to renounce
desires and aversions.
According to the Upaniṣads, the total world of beings dwelling in the
surface of this globe, falls under four types :
1. Jarāyuja or Garbhaja – Those that are born from the womb;
2. Aṇḍaja – Those that are born from eggs;
3. Svedaja – Those that are born from warm vapour or sweat; and
4. Udbhijja – Those that are born of seeds or sprouting up.
All these together indicate the entire world of beings that exists here
amidst us. In order to indicate the entire cosmos, Janaka amplifies
his statement and says, ‘From the Creator down to a grass blade’.
In short, in the entire cosmos of created beings, the Man of
Realisation alone is the sole being who has in him the unique
capacity to renounce all his desires and aversions. These two
feelings represent the entire activities of the mind. The Man of
Perfection alone is the one who has gone beyond his mind and
hence this uniqueness in him. There is no ego in him and, therefore,
he does not react to the external world, in terms of likes and dislikes
or in terms of desires and aversions.
Our mind is coloured by our perceptions and therefore, loaded
down with their own vāsanās. The mind lives its days in self-created
bondages. The liberated one is he who has renounced the world of
perceptions, meaning who has risen above his mind and has
apprehended the Self. This is the burden of a mantra in
Mahopaniṣad: ‘In case you depend upon the world of perceptions,
then your mind is bound. In case your mind has fully renounced the
world of perceptions, then your mind is liberated.’3
आ ानम यं  कि  ानाित  जगदी रम्।
य ेि   त   कु  ते  न  भयं  त   कु  िचत्॥६॥
ātmānam-advayaṁ kaścijjānāti jagadīśvaram, 
yadvetti tatsa kurute na bhayaṁ tasya kutracit. (6)
आ ानम्  – Self; अ यम्  – one without a second, non-dual; कि त् –
rarely one; जानाित – knows; जगदी रम्  – Lord of the universe; यत्  –
which; वेेि  – knows; तत्  – that; सः – he; कु  ते – does; न – not; भयम् –
fear; त   – his; कु  िचत्  – anywhere
6. Rare indeed is the one who knows the Self, as one without a
second and as the Lord of the universe. He does what comes to his
mind and has no fears from any quarters.
In this concluding stanza, the disciple discovers a daring courage, in
the depth of his own experienced sense of divinity as the Self. He
has realised himself not only as the one infinite Self, but also as the
Governor, the Ruler, the Controller, the Lord of the universe of
names and forms. Such an individual ‘does whatever comes to his
mind’ meaning, he fearlessly undertakes to do whatever he
considers worth doing. Nothing, low and base, can ever come to
molest his thoughts. Ever identified with the Infinite, his inspired
bosom overflows ever with his divinely brilliant and sweet thoughts
for the benefit and glory of the world. He is always confident that his
actions are expressions of the divine blessings conveyed to the
community, through his equipments. He has no fear of criticism from
any quarters. Evidently, the Teacher Aṣṭāvakra is satisfied with the
student's confidence in his own wisdom and, therefore, he continues
his discourse in the following chapter.
1 antaḥ saṁsikta-nirmukto jīvo madhura-vṛttimān,
bahiḥ kurvannakurvan vā kartā bhoktā nahi kvacit. – Annapūrṇopaniṣad-1.57
2 bhedā-bhadau sapadi galitau puṇya-pāpe viśīrṇe,
māyā-mohau kṣayamupagatau naṣṭa-sandeha-vṛtteḥ.
śabdātītaṁ triguṇa-rahitaṁ prāpya tatvāvabodhaṁ,
nistraiguṇye pathi vicaratāṁ ko vidhiḥ ko niṣedhaḥ. – Śukāṣṭakam
3 dṛśyamāśrayasīdaṁ cet tat sacitto'si bandhavān,
dṛśyaṁ santyajasīdaṁ cet tadā citto'si mokṣavān. – Mahopaniṣad-4.35

Chapter – 5
Four Methods – Dissolution of Ego
Introduction
In the direct experience of the transcendental Self, to dissolve the
perceiving equipments and the perceived world of experiences, is to
Aṣṭāvakra, the significance of the term ‘laya’, dissolution. This is to
be attained in different stages, as it is impossible for anyone to
achieve it in one sudden leap. The four different stages through
which a sincere seeker can accomplish this total dissolution of his
ego consciousness is the theme of this chapter.
This technique of ‘laya’ starts with the ending of the body
consciousness and then stage by stage it ultimately takes the seeker
to the experience of the absolute aloneness of the Self Divine
(kaivalya). To contemplate upon the supreme Self with such intensity
and consistency that the mind has no accommodation to entertain
thoughts of the body or the sense objects, is the state of ‘total
dissolution’. Unbroken and continuous God remembrance is one of
the simplest practices in ultimately achieving this state of ‘total
dissolution’ (laya).
अ ाव   उवाच
न  ते  स ोऽ    के नािप  िकं  शु   ुिम िस।
स ातिवलयं  कु व  ेवमेव  लयं   ज॥१॥
aṣṭāvakra uvāca
na te saṅgo'sti kenāpi kiṁ śuddhastyaktum-icchasi,
saṅghāta-vilayaṁ kurvannevam-eva layaṁ vraja. (1)
न – not; ते – your; स ः  – contact; अ   – is; के न – with anything; अिप
– verily; िकम् – what; शु ः  – pure;   ुम्  – to renounce; इ िस –
wish; स ातिवलयम् – dissolution of body complex; कु व न्  – effecting;
एवम्  – thus; एव – indeed; लयम्  – the state of dissolution;  ज – attain
Aṣṭāvakra said:
1. You have no contact with anything whatsoever. Pure as you are,
what do you want to renounce? Having dissolved the body-complex,
enter into ‘laya’ – the state of dissolution.
As the infinite Self, the very 'Substratum' for the entire illusory world
superimposed upon you, what is there in you, the pure Self, to
renounce? You have no contact with anything. The post is
untouched by the ghost; what can the post renounce?
The body complex generally indicated in the Vedānta śāstra by
the term 'saṅghāta’ is constituted of the sense organs, mind, intellect
and ego. Even though in the pure Self there is nothing other than
Itself, we have found how, when there is non-apprehension of the
Self, such misapprehensions do powerfully surge up. At this moment
we live identified with these and act and live as though we are
nothing but the body complex in us. In the continuous confident self-
assertion, ‘I am the infinite Self’, to dissolve away the matter
aggregate about us, is to end the ego. ‘In this way enter ‘laya’ – the
state of dissolution’, advises Aṣṭāvakra.
We are reminded of a similar assertion in Annapūrṇopaniṣad:
‘That which has neither the beginning nor an end, can have no
cause for itself. Therein dissolve (laya) your mind-intellect equipment
and remain ever undisturbed. Such an individual shall never have to
ever return into misery and pain.’1
 ेि ो ि  े 
उदेित  भवतो  िव ं  वा रधे रव  बुद् बुदः।
इित   ा ैकमा ानमेवमेव  लयं   ज॥२॥
udeti bhavato viśvaṁ vāridheriva budbudaḥ,
iti jñātvaikam-ātmānam-evam-eva layaṁ vraja. (2)
उदेित – rises; भवतः  – from You; िव म् – universe; वा रधेः  – from the
sea; इव – like; बुद् बुदः  – bubble; इित – thus;  ा ा – having
apprehended; एकम् – one; आ ानम्  – Self; एवम् – in this way; एव –
verily; लयम् – a state of dissolution;  ज – enter
2. The universe rises from You, like a bubble from the sea, thus
comprehend the non-dual Self. In this way, enter into ‘laya’ – the
state of dissolution.
‘The sea and the waves or bubbles’ is a very fascinating metaphor
that Aṣṭāvakra employs very often all through his song. Here is an
exercise in contemplation. Just as the bubbles rising from the sea
are all nothing but the waters of the sea, and they rise in different
forms, they exist and play about for a time and then disappear to
become, in the end, nothing but the waters of the sea, so too,
universes spring up from the Self.
Consistently thus contemplating, quieten the demands and the
agitations, passions and restlessness of the equipments. In the
hushed silence of such a deep meditation, the undisturbed
Consciousness in Its great grand infinitude can then be
apprehended. ‘In this way enter into ‘laya’ – the state of dissolution’.
Here in the second stage of the dissolution, Aṣṭāvakra indicates
that the seeker must dissolve his mind and its desire prompted
storms within.
The assertion ‘I am the infinite Self’ is a daring one and the heroic
in heart, protected by his deep understanding of the scriptural texts
alone can undertake to walk this majestic path of meditation as
described in Vedānta. The implication to the assertion ‘I am the Self’,
is declared in a verse in Yogavāsiṣṭha: ‘Maintain the attitude that
whatever the Creator, Indra, Viṣṇu and Varuṇa can achieve and
accomplish, that I, the pure Consciousness can indeed achieve.’2
This is not a blasphemy; this is pure spiritual might! This state
cannot be reached all of a sudden; this is to be achieved in slow and
steady stages as indicated in the Bhagavad-gītā: ‘Little by little, let
him attain quietude by the intellect held in firmness; having made the
mind established in the Self, let him not think of anything.’3
   म व ु ाि  ं  ना मले   िय।
र ुसप   इव    मेवमेव  लयं   ज॥३॥
pratyakṣam-apyavastutvād-viśvaṁ nāstyamale tvayi,
rajju-sarpa iva vyaktam-evam-eva layaṁ vraja. (3)
   म्  – visible; अिप – though; अव ु ात्  – on account of being
unreal; िव म्  – universe; न – not; अ   – is; अमले – pure;  िय – in
you; र ुसप ः  – the snake in the rope; इव – like;   म्  – manifested;
एवम् – thus; एव – verily; लयम् – the state of dissolution;  ज – attain
3. The universe even though visible, because it is unreal, like the
snake in the rope, does not exist in you, who are pure. Thus, in this
way, enter into ‘laya’ – the state of dissolution.
Ordinarily, when we perceive a thing, we take it for granted that the
thing exists, but there are examples wherein perception is not a sure
guarantee for the actual existence of the thing perceived. The ‘snake
in the rope’, the ‘silver in the seashell,’ the ‘ghost in the post’ are all
illusions. Employing this very familiar analogy of the Upaniṣads,
Aṣṭāvakra points out that even though the universe is manifested
and is available for our direct perception, in moments of Self-
unfoldment, in the higher plane of Consciousness, it has no
existence at all. Thus having known the universe to be a mere
illusion, superimposed upon the Self, negate the universe of names
and forms and ‘in this way enter into ‘laya’ – the state of dissolution’.
This is the third stage in ‘laya’, where the universe is negated and
dissolved into the Consciousness of the meditator.
Annapūrṇopaniṣad applauds this technique and says that: ‘One who
has accomplished this dissolution is ever in the aloneness of the
Infinitude; even in a crowded city his aloneness is not disturbed.’4
Gauḍapāda in his Kārikā also recommends the practice of ‘laya’
by completely withdrawing the mind from all sense objects through
single pointed contemplation upon the Self. In Aparokṣānubhūti,
Ᾱcārya Śaṅkara indicates three stages of ‘laya’ through
contemplation :
1. Disassociation from the body and the world;
2. Identification with the Self and
3. Forgetting to remember even the knowledge of the Self.
The process of ‘laya’ should not be misunderstood as a path of
mere negation. Neither Aṣṭāvakra nor the Bhagavad-gītā
recommends this technique of mere negation; this is a negative path
and can get the student only into a dark pit of ‘non-existence’
(śūnya). The process recommended by the ṛṣis of Upaniṣads is to
flush out the egocentric mind of all its thoughts of the pluralistic world
with a continuous flood of contemplation upon the non-dual Self.
समदुः खसुखः  पूण   आशानैरा योः  समः।
समजीिवतमृ ुः  स ेवमेव  लयं   ज॥४॥
sama-duḥkha-sukhaḥ pūrṇa āśā-nairāśyayoḥ samaḥ,
sama-jīvita-mṛtyuḥ sannevam-eva layaṁ vraja. (4)
समदुः खसुखः – to whom pain and pleasure are the same; पूण  – perfect;
आशानैरा योः  – in hope and disappointment; समः  – same;
 ीि
समजीिवतमृ ुः  – to whom life and death are same; सन्  – being; एवम् –
thus; एव – verily; लयम् – the state of dissolution;  ज – attain
4. You are perfect and the same in pain and pleasure, in hope and
disappointment and in life and death. Thus, in this way, enter into
‘laya’ – the state of dissolution.
In this fourth and the last stage of ‘laya’, Aṣṭāvakra prescribes for the
seeker a process by which all his intellectual estimates and
responses are dissolved in the steady contemplation upon the nature
of the Self.
Pain and pleasure, hope and disappointment, life and death are
all intellectual evaluations and its habitual concepts. To dissolve the
intellect is to end its functions. In the Self there are none of these
intellectual evaluations. They are all objects of Consciousness.
Above the intellect and therefore, beyond its estimates, shines the
Self that illumines the very intellect. ‘In this way enter into ‘laya’ – the
state of dissolution’. To contemplate upon the Self as the one
constant witness of all agitations of the mind and intellect and all
functions of the body, is to bring about complete dissolution of the
ego and the world interpreted by the ego.
These are the four stages prescribed by Aṣṭāvakra for
accomplishing the total dissolution of the individualised
Consciousness and for merging it into the infinite Self.
1 padamādyamanādyantaṁ tasya bījaṁ na vidyate,
tatra saṁlīyate saṁvit nirvikalpaṁ ca tiṣṭhati.
bhūyo na vartate duḥkheḥ tatra labdhapasaḥ pumān
– Annapūrṇopaniṣad-4.68 & 69
2 brahmendra-viṣṇu-varuṇāḥ yadyat-kartuṁ samudyatāḥ,
tad-ahaṁ cid-vapuḥ sarvaṁ karomītyeva bhāvayet. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-6.121.8
3 śanaiḥ śanairuparamed buddhyā dhṛti-gṛhītayā,
ātma-saṁsthaṁ manaḥ kṛtvā na kiñcid-api cintayet. – Bhagavad-gītā-6.25
4 yathā vipaṇagā lokā viharanto' pyasatsamāḥ,
asambandhāt tathā jñasya grāmo'pi vipinopamaḥ. – Annapūrṇopaniṣad-1.33

Chapter – 6
The Self Supreme
Introduction
The entire song of Aṣṭāvakra is conceived in the form of a dialogue
between himself and his royal disciple, Janaka. We, as students,
aspiring to comprehend the vision of Vedānta of the non-dual Self,
are staggered at the vision Aṣṭāvakra points out. We get
dumbfounded at the giddy heights to which the uncompromising
pure vision of Janaka lifts us.
In the previous chapter, Saint Aṣṭāvakra prescribes the path of
laya-yoga, but here his disciple, the royal seer, Janaka complains
that in his vision of the supreme Self, he finds nothing to dissolve!
What can there be in the one non-dual Self other than Itself for us to
dissolve? It is beyond everything – ‘Beyond the beyond’ (prakṛteḥ
paraḥ; parāt-paraḥ). Even the very effort at laya-yoga declares the
existence of ‘ignorance’.
The Self in this absolute sense is the theme of discussion in this
chapter. The Self is indicated here as the cosmic space and the
universe a pot in it; once the Self is realised, the universe cannot
ever condition the infinite Self.
In Aṣṭāvakra-gītā the transcendence and the immanence of the
Self are equally emphasised; this is the grand style of the Gītā
philosophy: ‘All in the one Self, and the one Self in all’. In such a
state no ‘laya’ can be practised. To pursue laya-yoga a residual
amount of ignorance is necessary to maintain in the seeker the
witnessing ego, to strive for the dissolution of itself in the supreme
Self.
जनक  उवाच
आकाशवदन ोऽहं  घटव ाकृ तं  जगत्।
इित   ानं  तथैत   न   ागो  न   हो  लयः॥१॥
janaka uvāca
ākāśavad-ananto'haṁ ghaṭavat-prākṛtaṁ jagat,
iti jñānaṁ tathaitasya na tyāgo na graho layaḥ. (1)
आकाशवत्  – like space; अन ः  – limitless; अहम् – I; घटवत्  – like a jar;
 ाकृ तम्  – phenomenal; जगत्  – world; इित – this;  ानम् – true
Knowledge; तथा – then; एत  – of this; न – not;  ागः –
relinquishment; न – not;  हः – acceptance; लयः – dissolution
Janaka said:
1. Infinite as space am I and the world like a limited jar; this is ‘true
Knowledge’. There is nothing then to be renounced nor to be
accepted nor to be destroyed.
In the previous chapter, the Teacher, Aṣṭāvakra, out of his infinite
kindness, came down a little from the peak of the absolute and
recommended to his student the path of dissolution (laya). Janaka,
the disciple, however, from a still higher standpoint ridicules the very
idea of merging the ego into the supreme Consciousness which is
ever infinite and one without a second.
In the very opening verse Janaka takes the thunder away from
Aṣṭāvakra's discourse on the technique of the merger (laya).
The supreme Self is often compared with the cosmic space in
which the universes move and individualised ego-consciousness as
a limited, insignificant mud pot and its pot space stays. Space
(ākāśa) is a very familiar comparison oft-repeated by various ṛṣis in
different Upaniṣads.1
Māṇḍūkya Kārikā is considered as a text in Vedānta that has
come to be written after Aṣṭāvakra-gītā and the Kārikā is generally
considered to have drawn its inspiration from this Gītā. The Kārikā
elaborates this analogy of the space and the pot space, illustrating
the infinite Consciousness and the limited ego consciousness. The
elaboration by the author of the Kārikā is very illuminating for the
students to reflect upon.2
From the absolute standpoint of the one homogeneous supreme
Consciousness, there is neither an ego, nor an ego-perceived
illusory world of plurality. No doubt, this is the goal – the highest
state of Realisation. Janaka abiding in this Reality complains that he
cannot practise ‘laya’, as in the pure Self ‘there is nothing to be
renounced or to be accepted, or to be destroyed’. The Kārikā sings
the same idea as a chorus to the song of Aṣṭāvakra : ‘There in the
Self, which is the final fulfilment of the actions of the mind, there is
neither any perception, nor any self-projection into ideas.
Established in the Self, the self revelling in Knowledge (the jñāna)
reaches the state of immutability and homogeneity.’3
One who is the Self already; he has nothing to bring into ‘laya’.
Mahopaniṣad sings: ‘One who dwells into transcendental state, as
full and perfect mass of Consciousness, neither perturbed nor
fulfilled, he no more lives in the world of change.’4
महोदिध रवाहं  स   प ो  वीिचसि भः।
इित   ानं  तथैत   न   ागो  न   हो  लयः॥२॥
mahodadhir-ivāhaṁ sa prapañco vīcisannibhaḥ,
iti jñānaṁ tathaitasya na tyāgo na graho layaḥ. (2)
 ो ि
महोदिधः  – ocean; इव – like; अहम्  – I am; सः – that;  प ः  –
phenomenal universe; वीिचसि भः  – like the wave; इित – this;  ानम् –
true Knowledge; तथा – then; एत  – of this; न – not;  ागः  –
relinquishment; न – not;  हः – acceptance; लयः  – dissolution
2. I am like the ocean and the universe is like a wave: this is ‘true
Knowledge’. There is nothing then to be renounced or to be
accepted or to be destroyed.
All scriptures are forced to talk of the Supreme through myth –
through special metaphors, analogies and images, which express
what It is like and not what It is. The Supreme is an experience that
is inexpressible in language. It is beyond our thoughts and our
speech. It is That because of which we are conscious of our
thoughts and by which we are able to verbalise our thoughts.
Such myths are extremely useful for communicating the spiritual
knowledge to the prepared students. Don't we employ them often in
interpreting science to the average man? Do we not explain electric
forces by comparing them with the behaviour of water waves or air
movements? Here electricity is neither water nor air; to confuse the
image for the fact is as ridiculous as climbing up the signpost instead
of pursuing the road!
Such a warning is necessary, lest we are carried away by the
impressive images rather than the truth that the images indicate.
Here Janaka explains how from the state of pure Self, he is like a
shoreless ocean and the universes rising in him are like its waves. A
wave, we can say, is a limited and conditioned ocean; yet the wave
once merged back into the ocean is nothing but the ocean. The
limitations and the conditionings in the wave are all apparent,
temporary and of no great significance. What is the sense in asking
the ocean to merge the waves to realise its own peaceful vastness
and majesty?
With this striking example, the idea that the Infinite gets
conditioned is totally removed from the reflective mind of the
contemplative student. Yet, the idea that the Infinite undergoes
modifications, in expressing as the pluralistic phenomenal world, is
not excluded from the picture of the ocean and the waves. Hence,
the justification for the examples repeated in the following verse –
अहं  स  शु  स ाशो    वि  क ना।
इित   ानं  तथैत   न   ागो  न   हो  लयः॥३॥
ahaṁ sa śukti-sañkāśo rūpyavad-viśvakalpanā,
iti jñānaṁ tathaitasya na tyāgo na graho layaḥ. (3)
अहम् – I; सः – that; शु  स ाशः  – like seashell, mother-of-pearl;
  वत्  – like the silvery shine; िव क ना – the illusion of the
universe; इित – this;  ानम् – true Knowledge; तथा – then; एत  – of
this; न – not;  ागः  – relinquishment; न – not;  हः – acceptance; लयः  –
dissolution
3. I am like the seashell and the illusion of the universe is like the
silveriness, this is ‘true Knowledge.’ There is nothing then to be
renounced nor to be accepted nor to be destroyed.
This famous example hinted at here is only to disabuse the mind of
the student who suspects that the infinite Self has undergone a
temporary modification in Itself to play as the finite world of names
and forms. The silveriness is not a modification of the shell; the shell
remains as it is. The substratum is not affected by the illusory
projections that are apprehended upon it. True Knowledge is when I
realise that I am the pure Consciousness and the ego and its fields
of experiences are all illusory imaginations of the ego. From such a
perfect state of universal oneness, no doubt, the laya-yoga cannot
be practised.
  े   ो ि
अहं  वा  सव भूतेषु  सव भूता थो  मिय।
इित   ानं  तथैत   न   ागो  न   हो  लयः॥४॥
ahaṁ vā sarvabhūteṣu sarvabhūtānyatho mayi,
iti jñānaṁ tathaitasya na tyāgo na graho layaḥ. (4)
अहम् – I; वा – indeed; सव भूतेषु – in all beings (am); सव भूतािन – all
beings; अथो – and; मिय – in Me; इित – this;  ानम् – true Knowledge;
तथा – then; एत  – of this; न – not;  ागः  – relinquishment; न – not;
 हः – acceptance; लयः  – dissolution
4. I am, indeed, in all beings and all beings are in Me, this is ‘true
Knowledge’. There is nothing then to be renounced nor to be
accepted nor to be destroyed.
According to the Upaniṣads, Self-realisation does not mean the
discovery of the seeker's divinity and the recognition of the undivinity
of all other things in the universe! To awake to the higher
Consciousness is to recognise, thereafter, nothing but the splash of
the blinding Beauty Divine in all Its glory, spread all around for all
times. When awakened from the dream, the entire dream should get
drowned in the waking Consciousness.
This total transmutation of the vision of the Man of Perfection, is
indicated in the Īśāvāsya-upaniṣad5 and repeated in the Bhagavad-
gītā.6
Janaka faithfully follows the scriptures, both in language and
thought content, when he declares ‘I am indeed in all beings and all
beings are in Me.’ The entire ghost is in the post and the post
pervades the ghost.
From this standpoint, what is there, other than the Self to dissolve
in the Self, through the process of ‘laya’?
1 ākāśaṁ ātmā – Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad-3.2.13
ākāśa ātmā – Taittirīyopaniṣad-2.2
äkäçaà brahma – Chändogyopaniñad -7.12.2
2Māṇḍūkya Kārikā. – 3.7
3 graho na tatra notsargaḥ cintā yatra na vidyate,
ātmasaṁsthaṁ tadā jñānam ajāti samatāṁ gatam. – Māṇḍūkya Kārikā-3.38
4 sarvātītapadālambī paripūrṇaika cinmayaḥ,
nodvegī na ca tuṣṭātmā saṁsāre nāvasīdati. – Mahopaniñad-6.63
5 yastu sarvāṇi bhūtānyātmanyevānupaśyati,
sarvabhūteṣu cātmānaṁ tato na vijugupsate. – Īśāvāsya-upaniṣad-6
6 sarvabhūtasthamātmānaṁ sarvabhūtāni cātmani,
īkṣate yogayuktātmā sarvatra samadarśanaḥ. – Bhagavad-gītā-6.29

Chapter – 7
That Tranquil Self
Introduction
Even intelligent educated men readily accept the idea that we come
into the world and this implies that the world is something alien to us
– something totally different from us. If we pause for a moment to
think, it is evidently clear that this idea that we come into the world is
against all our day's scientific knowledge. Science insists upon and
proves that we do not come into the world; in fact we come out of the
world.
In this chapter Aṣṭāvakra goes yet one step further, ahead of the
knowledge of the scientists and declares that the universe itself
comes out of the Self!
As ocean ‘waves’, the Self ‘universes’, and the universe ‘peoples’
– if we are permitted to coin and use such strange looking but
eloquent terms. In short, just as the waves are the ocean, we are not
isolated ‘egos’ functioning inside separate bodies nor is the world
populated by masses of such separate entities. They all rise from the
ocean of Self, when the storms of the mind howl through
Consciousness.
Even without bringing this surging mind, through contemplation,
into its dissolution (laya), the infinite Self, ever peaceful, from which
the very mind has risen, is ever beyond all agitations. Except for its
waves on the surface, the ocean is calm and serene in its
immeasurable depths.
Abide in the Self, wherein due to the desires of the mind, worlds
of names and forms heave forth, as though produced at the raising
of a magician's wand. The creation and the dissolution of the
universe are both illusions of the unsteady mind. To the Self there is
neither the anxiety to accept nor the labour to reject the mind and its
imaginary worlds. The ocean of Consciousness ever remains the
same, and apparently waves up to play the illusion of names and
forms.
Having hinted that laya-yoga itself is only for those who have in
themselves lingering shadows of 'ignorance' (ego), Janaka seems to
feel yet unsatisfied and so he bursts forth into a lyrical song upon the
glory of the tranquil Self in this chapter.
जनक  उवाच
म न महा ोधौ  िव पोत  इत तः।
 मित   ा वात ेन  न  ममा सिह ुता॥१॥
janaka uvāca
mayyananta-mahāmbhodhau viśvapota itastataḥ,
bhramati svānta-vātena na mamāstyasahiṣṇutā. (1)
मिय – in Me; अन महा ोधौ – in the shoreless ocean; िव पोतः – the
ark of the universe; इत तः  – here and there;  मित – moves;
 ा वात ेन – by the wind of its own mind (universal mind); न – not; मम
– My; अ   – is; असिह ुता – intolerance, impatience
Janaka said:
1. In Me, the shoreless ocean, the ark of the universe, moves here
and there, driven by the wind of its own mind (universal mind). I am
not impatient.
In a Man of Realisation it is absurd to say that he recognises no
world of plurality around him nor that his mind and intellect have no
thought flow in them. But unlike us he is never disturbed by the
confusions within and without him, because he is ever abiding in his
deep experience: ‘I am the infinite Self’.
In this shoreless ocean of Consciousness, like the waves, the
universe rises up, plays about and merges back. The peaceful
surface of the clear Consciousness is whipped up into waves of
names and forms by our own mental storms. An individual mind
creates individual worlds of its own likes and dislikes, of its joys and
sorrows. Thus, my world is created by my mind and your world is
created by your mind. Though, we both are living in one and the
same universe, perhaps at one and the same time and space, yet,
each one of us lives in an individual, self-interpreted, private world of
one's own.
The universe is the common field where all the existing minds
can experience freely their own individual worlds of joys and
sorrows. Therefore, the total universe is not the projection of an
individual mind but it is the play of the total mind, or we may call it as
the universal mind. ‘By the wind of its own mind’ (svānta vātena), the
universe of names and forms moves along its path of history,
bumping along, now through brilliant eras of creative beauty and now
through dark ages of miseries and sorrows.
Janaka realises that the disturbances in the individual life and in
the universal life around are all illusory confusions projected by the
individual mind and the universal mind. The royal saint naturally
confesses, ‘I am not impatient’. No wise man is impatient either with
the disturbances around him or at the daily stories of achievements
and failures of the world of his era. This ever-changing phenomenal
world and its ceaseless modifications do not affect the Self in the
least.
 ो ौ ीि
म न महा ोधौ  जग ीिचः   भावतः।
उदेतु  वा मायातु  न  मे  वृ  न   च   ितः॥२॥
mayyananta-mahāmbhodhau jagad-vīciḥ svabhāvataḥ,
udetu vāstam-āyātu na me vṛddhirna ca kṣatiḥ. (2)
मिय – in Me; अन महा ोधौ – in the limitless ocean; जगद  वीिचः  – the
waves of the world;  भावतः  – spontaneously; उदेतु – may rise; वा –
or; अ म्  – dissolution; आयातु – may attain; न – not; मे – My; वृ  ः  –
increase; न – not; च – and;  ितः  – decrease
2. In Me, the limitless ocean, let the waves of the world rise and
vanish spontaneously. I experience neither increase nor decrease (of
Me) thereby.
Janaka amplifies the significance of the metaphor that he has used
in the previous verse. When the waves heave up in the ocean, each
wave has a different form and an apparent identity of its own,
sufficient to distinguish it from all other waves. Yet, in a sense, they
are all nothing else but ocean water. If more waves settle down,
because it has swallowed up all the waves, the ocean does not
thereby get swelled up! The worlds of names and forms are nothing
but a ripple upon the infinite Self. ‘I am the Self’, is the spiritual
experience, the final wisdom. Naturally, in Me the spontaneous rise
of the worlds or their dissolution, cannot bring any disturbance at all
– I know, I am the changeless, immutable Self.
To Aṣṭāvakra, māyā is not, it seems, a very attractive philosophic
principle. He recognises and deals with only the concept of
‘ignorance' (avidyā or ajñāna). Due to the non-apprehension of the
Self, there are the misapprehensions of the worlds and this
ignorance manifests as the mind. Śaṅkara in Vivekacūḍāmaṇi
clarifies it : ‘ There is no ignorance beyond the mind; the mind alone
is ignorance, the cause for all the sorrows of change. When it is
destroyed, all are destroyed; when it projects, everything gets
projected.’1
 ो ौ ि ि
म न महा ोधौ  िव ं  नाम  िवक ना।
अितशा ो  िनराकार  एतदेवाहमा  थतः॥३॥
mayyananta-mahāmbhodhau viśvaṁ nāma vikalpanā,
atiśānto nirākāra etadevāham-āsthitaḥ. (3)
मिय – in Me; ; अन महा ोधौ – in the shoreless ocean; िव म् –
universe; नाम – called; िवक ना – imagination; अितशा ः  – profoundly
tranquil; िनराकारः – formless; एतत् – this; एव – alone; अहम्  – I; आ  थतः
– abiding
3. In Me, the shoreless ocean, is the imagined illusion of the
universe. I am the profoundly tranquil and formless. In this
Knowledge alone, I abide.
In the previous verse we have the metaphor of the ocean and the
waves, which might probably give a hasty student a suspicion that
the world of names and forms is a modification, temporary though it
be, of the infinite Self. To contradict this false notion this verse is
employed.
The world of names and forms is only the imagination (vikalpanā)
of the total mind. It has no existence whatsoever. The Self is
undisturbed, profoundly peaceful and ever formless. Earlier in the
opening chapter it was said: ‘ All which have form are false, the
formless is the changeless.’2
ना ा  भावेषु  नो  भाव  ान े  िनर ने।
इ स ोऽ  ृहः  शा   एतदेवाहमा  थतः॥४॥
nātmā bhāveṣu no bhāvas-tatrānante nirañjane,
ityasakto'spṛhaḥ śānta etadevāham-āsthitaḥ. (4)
न – not; आ ा – Self; भावेषु – in the objects; न – not; भावः  – object; त 
– in That (Self); अन े – limitless; िनर ने – taintless; इित – hence;
अस ः  – unattached; अ  ृहः  – desireless; शा ः  – tranquil; एतत् – this;
एव – alone; अहम्  – I; आ  थतः  – abide in
4. The Self is not in the object, nor is the object in this Self, which is
infinite and taintless. Hence, it is free from attachment and desire; it
is tranquil. In this Knowledge alone I abide.
The post is not in the ghost; the ghost is illusory; nor is the ghost at
anytime in the post. Similarly, the objects of the world being
imaginations of the mind, are not in the Self which is the substratum
of the world perceived; nor can the Self be in the illusory objects!
Naturally, the infinite and the taintless, the Self is free from any
attachment to anything; nor can It entertain any desires for anything.
Nothing can ever remain as other than the Self: ātmā ekameva idaṁ
sarvam. ‘The one Self alone is all these’ says the Upaniṣad.
Attachment and desires are delusions of the mind. When these two
are transcended, the mind is also transcended. Where the mind is
not, there is nothing to disturb the Consciousness and, therefore, it is
ever tranquil. In this firm Knowledge, born out of his direct
experience Janaka confesses, ‘I abide’.
अहो  िच ा मेवाहिम जालोपमं  जगत्।
अतो  मम  कथं  कु    हेयोपादेयक ना॥५॥
aho cinmātram-evāham-indrajālopamaṁ jagat,
ato mama kathaṁ kutra heyopādeya-kalpanā. (5)
अहो  – O! Marvellous; िच ा म्  – pure Consciousness; एव – really;
अहम्  – I; इ जाल  उपमम् – like a magic show; जगत्  – world; अतः  –
therefore; मम – My; कथम् – how ; कु   – where; हेय  उपादेय  क ना –
notions of rejection or acceptance in Me
5. O Marvellous! I am really pure Consciousness. The world is like a
magic show. Hence, how and where can there be any notion of
rejection or acceptance in Me?
Nothing in this world can either attract or repel a Man of Wisdom.
He, in perfect detachment, continuously enjoys this free show of the
seething universe of multiplicity around him. To him the world show
is fantasy created by his mind with its imagination. There is no reality
in it, though it apparently is available for the time being for his
perception. Naturally, therefore, there is nothing for him to accept or
reject in this vast illusory show of his own mind in agitation.
This attitude of the wise helps him even while he is functioning in
the world, for the guidance of the community.
Mahopaniṣad advises: ‘O Man of pure intelligence, with mind at
rest, though restlessly working outside, as an apparent doer outside,
but really as a non-doer within, play about in the world of activities
and attachments.’3
Abiding in the Self, Men of Wisdom apparently function in the
world outside, though in their depths they are ever actionless, ever
tranquil.
1 na hyastyavidyā manaso'tiriktā mano hyavidyā bhavabandhahetuḥ,
tasminvinaṣṭe sakalaṁ vinaṣṭaṁ vijṛmbhite'sminsakalaṁ vijṛmbhate.
– Vivekacūḍāmaṇi-169
2 sākāramanṛtaṁ viddhi nirākāraṁ tu niścalam. – Aṣṭāvakra-gītā-1.18
3 bahiḥ kṛtrimasaṁrambho hṛdi saṁrambhavarjitaḥ,
kartā bahirakartāntarloke vihara śuddhadhīḥ. – Mahopaniṣad-6.68

Chapter – 8
Bondage and Freedom
Introduction
If what has been so beautifully described by Janaka in the previous
chapter be the true knowledge of the tranquil Self, why is it that this
blissful experience is denied to the majority of the suffering
humanity? Aṣṭāvakra takes up this logical doubt for discussion and
explains in this chapter how the ‘bondage’, and why the ‘freedom’.
The extrovertedness of the mind and, therefore, the outgoing
tendencies of the ego, characterise the state of bondage. The mind
and the ego sense turning towards the Self, the state of mind's
dissolution and ego’s rediscovery of its permanent identity with Self,
constitute the state of ‘freedom’.
When the mind rushes out recognising a world of objects, it runs
wild among them rejecting things that are not conducive and
pursuing things that are imagined to be conducive to its happiness.
Desiring and hating, accepting and rejecting, hunting after some
things and being hunted after by other things, constructing and
destroying, loving and fighting, from womb to the tomb, the ego
strives and struggles, pants and suffers; this is bondage.
Mahopaniṣad1 defines the ‘bondage’ with one word, namely,
‘mameti’ – ‘mineness’, and with another single word ‘nirmameti’,
namely, ‘not-mineness’ – the ‘freedom’.
अ ाव   उवाच
 ो ि ि ि ि ो ि
तदा  ब ो  यदा  िच ं  िकि  ा ित  शोचित।
िकि  ु ित  गृ ाित  िकि द् घृ ित  कु  ित॥१॥
aṣṭāvakra uvāca
tadā bandho yadā cittaṁ kiñcid-vāñchati śocati,
kiñcin-muñcati gṛhṇāti kiñcid-dhṛśyati kupyati. (1)
तदा – then; ब ः  – bondage; यदा – when; िच ं  – mind; िकि त्  –
anything; वा ित – desires; शोचित – grieves; िकि त्  – anything; मु ित
– rejects; गृ ाित – accepts; िकि त्  – anything;   ित – feels happy;
कु  ित – feels angry
Aṣṭāvakra said :
1. It is bondage when the mind desires or grieves at anything; does
reject or accept anything; does feel happy or angry at anything.
First of all Aṣṭāvakra defines the state of bondage, since this is the
condition which is very familiar to we students in general. If they
were not already in bondage, they would not study Aṣṭāvakra-gītā,
but would keep on singing their own gīta. Having brought the
condition of bondage acutely to the awareness of a student, it should
be relatively easy for that student to at least vaguely grasp what
exactly is the state of freedom.
Desire is an emotion that rises up to disturb the mind when it
recognises an object outside itself and passionately hopes that the
object of its fascination can give it a covetable satisfaction. When,
having procured an object of desire, if it decays in the embrace of
the mind, the sorrow suffered by the mind is called grief.
Things that the mind feels are not for itself conducive, it rejects
and things that are conducive, it accepts. Again, when the worldly
objects assembled around a mind in a pattern that is in line with its
present idea of joy, the mind feels happy; when the things get
arranged in a pattern contrary to the mind's present ideas of
happiness, the mind revolts against them; this is expressed as
anger.
To live thus a slave to the mind and its death dance is to live in
‘bondage’. Slavish obedience of the individual to the endless
demands of the body, mind and intellect for sense gratifications,
among the objects of the world outside, is the state of bondage.
तदा  मु  य दा  िच ं  न  वा ित  न  शोचित।
न  मु ित  न  गृ ाित  न    ित  न  कु  ित॥२॥
tadā muktir-yadā cittaṁ na vāñchati na śocati,
na muñcati na gṛhṇāti na hṛṣyati na kupyati. (2)
तदा – then; मु  ः  – freedom; यदा – when; िच ं  – mind; न – not; वा ित
– desires; न – not; शोचित – grieves; न – not; मु ित – rejects; न – not;
गृ ाित – accepts; न – not;   ित – feels happy; न – not; कु  ित – feels
angry
2. Freedom is attained when the mind does not desire or grieve,
does not reject or accept, does not feel happy or angry at anything.
In one line, that is the state of freedom, which is opposite to what
has been described earlier as the state of bondage of the mind. This
state of freedom cannot be attained unless the mind discovers the
source of a greater bliss in itself, so that in its utter satisfaction, the
mind gets no more tempted to gush out to embrace the sense
objects. Thunders Annapūrṇopaniṣad: ‘There is no freedom found
either in the outer space, or in the nether kingdom, or on the surface
of the earth. It is found only in the mind in which all desires have
dried up. When desires are conquered, the march of thoughts cease,
and the mind ends. This is the state of freedom.’2
The same idea is supported by the crisp statement in
Yogavāsiṣṭha: ‘Thought reduction is freedom, thought assertion is
bondage’3.
There is no other escape. The seeker must learn to rise above
his desire promptings. Elsewhere it is said: ‘This ignorance is nothing
but desires; when desires have ended, that state is called the state
of freedom. The moment you become desireless, instantaneously
that man of reflection has established himself in ‘freedom’4.
तदा  ब ो  यदा  िच ं  स ं  का िप   ि षु।
तदा  मो ो  यदा  िच मस ं  सव  ि षु॥३॥
tadā bandho yadā cittaṁ saktaṁ kāsvapi dṛṣṭiṣu,
tadā mokṣo yadā cittam-asaktaṁ sarvadṛṣṭiṣu. (3)
तदा – then; ब ः  – bondage; यदा – when; िच म् – mind; स म्  –
attached; कासु  अिप – to any;  ि षु – sensory perception; तदा – then;
मो ः  – freedom; यदा – when; िच म्  – mind; अस ं  – unattached;
सव  ि षु – in all sensory perceptions
3. It is bondage, when the mind is attached to any of the sensory
perceptions. It is freedom when the mind is detached from all
perceptions.
In the opening stanza, through its songful words, the Teacher had
indicated that the sensuousness in the mind is bondage, and in the
last verse it was indicated that detachment from it is freedom. In both
these verses, mind's relationship with the world of its own thoughts
was indicated. A mere detachment from the sensuous thoughts in
the inner mind by itself can have no valid effect upon the spiritual
seekers.
Here in the verse Aṣṭāvakra completes his thought by suggesting
that a seeker should carefully cultivate a sense of detachment from
his outer world of perceptions. The world of objects have a terrific
enchantment over the human mind. Even if an individual is capable
of ignoring the demands of his inner mind, the outer perceptions can
generate devastating sensuous storms in the mind. To live
susceptible to the various perceptions is ignorance and it will bring
about bondage. To learn to live in detachment of the perceived world
is freedom.
यदा  नाहं  तदा  मो ो  यदाहं  ब नं  तदा।
म ेित  हेलया  िकि त्  मा  गृहाण  िवमु   मा॥४॥
yadā nāhaṁ tadā mokṣo yadāhaṁ bandhanaṁ tadā,
matveti helayā kiñcit mā gṛhāṇa vimuñca mā. (4)
यदा – when; न – not; अहम्  – I; तदा – then; मो ः  – freedom; यदा –
when; अहम्  – I; ब नम् – bondage; तदा – then; म ा – knowing; इित –
thus; हेलया – playfully; िकि त्  – anything; मा – not; गृहाण – accept;
िवमु  – reject; मा – not
4. When there is no ego-‘I’ there is ‘freedom’, when there is ego-‘I’
there is ‘bondage’. Knowing thus, stop from accepting or rejecting
anything playfully.
In this closing verse of this chapter, Aṣṭāvakra warns the student that
he should not even playfully – even as a joke – accept any
perception. Even to reject a perception is to crystallise the ego and
recognise the illusory 'perceiver' within! Be a detached witness of the
things and happenings around and look at them with the eyes of
steady wisdom; where there is no ‘I’, the perceiver, that is the state
of freedom; and wherever there is I, the perceiver, expressing, that is
the state of bondage.
1 dve pade bandhamokṣāya nirmameti mameti ca,
mameti badhyate janturnirmameti vimucyate. – Mahopaniṣad-4.72
2 na mokṣo nabhasaḥ pṛṣṭhe na pātāle na bhūtale,
sarvāśāsaṅkṣaye cetaḥ kṣayo mokṣa itīṣyate. – Annapūrṇopaniṣad-2.23
3 bhāvanātānavaṁ mokṣo bandho hi dṛḍhabhāvanā. – Yogavāsiṣṭha -
6.85.120
4 icchāmātramavidyeyaṁ tannāśo mokṣa ucyate,
sa cāsaṅkalpamātreṇa siddho bhavati vai mune.

Chapter – 9
Indifference
Introduction
Aṣṭāvakra recommends a three-forked effort in the realisation of the
seeker’s real nature (svarūpa). This triple means for Self-realisation
is constituted of ‘indifference’ (nirveda), ‘equanimity’ (samatā) and
‘logical reasoning’ (yukti). Each one of these is reinforced by the
other two. Without indifference and equanimity, logical reasoning is
impossible and indifference will not be dynamic without mental
equanimity and intellectual reasoning. In fact, all the three are to be
integrally followed at the body, mind and intellect levels.
Indifference to the enchanting objects of the outer world is a
discipline for the body. Equanimity, maintained by not allowing the
mind to dance to the rhythm of its likes and dislikes, is an exercise
for the mind. To learn to logically reason out the illusory nature of the
world around and to come to detect the eternal Self is a training for
the intellect.
Clinging attachment to the body and through the body to the
sense objects strengthens the ego and deepens one’s spiritual
‘ignorance’. Indifference is the remedy; the seeker then becomes
free from his bonds to the world of sense pleasures. This world of
sense objects is really made up of the five great elements1 and their
modifications. They in themselves are utterly valueless. Yet our false
notions, born of our passions, cloak them with an imaginary beauty
and a fancied value. Having thus superimposed unreasonable
values upon the material objects, man runs after them and thus
creates for himself the painful saṁsāra and its tragic destinies.
Cultivate ‘nirveda’ towards them all. Desire cannot grow where
indifference has arrived.
Desire indeed is saṁsara. Indifference is only way to reach the
state of freedom.
अ ाव   उवाच
कृ ताकृ ते  च     ािन  कदा  शा ािन  क   वा।
एवं   ा  ेह  िनव दा व   ागपरोऽ ती॥१॥
aṣṭāvakra uvāca
kṛtākṛte ca dvandvāni kadā śāntāni kasya vā,
evaṁ jñātveha nirvedād-bhava tyāgaparo'vratī. (1)
कृ ताकृ ते – duties performed and not performed; च – and;    ािन –
pairs of opposites; कदा – when; शा ािन – ended; क   – whose; वा –
or; एवम् – thus;  ा ा  – having fully enquired; इह – in this world;
िनव दात्  – indifference; भव – become;  ागपरः  – devoted to
renunciation; अ ती – passionless
Aṣṭāvakra said:
1. To whom do the conflicts of duties performed and not performed
and of the pairs of opposites belong? When do they cease? End for
whom? Having thus fully enquired, through complete indifference to
the world, become passionless and be devoted to renunciation.
The line of enquiry is exhaustively indicated here. The duties
performed and not performed can bring disturbances only to the ego
in us that arrogates to itself the ‘doership’.
It is the ego’s sense of ‘enjoyership’ that experiences the tyranny
of the pairs of opposites. They can cease only when the ego is no
more and these illusory concepts belong to the equally illusory and
unreal ego.
The ghost and its sorrow should not affect the post, the ghost
itself being an illusion. The ego is itself a projection upon the Self
and so its conflicts, anxieties, sorrows and so on, cannot affect me,
the Self, who is the substratum for all the superimposition.
What should then be my attitude towards the world of objects? If
you see a pair of horns and a tail in me, what should be my
relationship with my non-existent horns and tail? Will it not be an
expression of my sympathy to you and your illusions, if I keep an
attitude of indifference to my horns and tail? And supposing you in
your friendship, would like to oil and massage my horns! Certainly, I
should allow you to do so, because the oil cannot soil me and you,
my friend, shall gain a great satisfaction!
If this attitude can be understood, then you have understood the
attitude of all Men of Perfection towards the world of objects and
beings. He is passionless and lives ever devoted to the spirit of
renunciation and negation of all illusory imaginations in the Self.
Here the term ‘avratī’ is translated as ‘passionless’. Literally the
word means ‘one who is no more observing the religious vows’
(vrataḥ). These observances are generally undertaken for the
fulfilment of some or other worldly desire. Hence the term in the
mouth of Aṣṭāvakra gathers a significant meaning, as ‘completely
passionless’.
Declares Mahopaniṣad: ‘Indifference to duties performed and not
performed, as laid out in the sacred texts, he remains in his pure
Self, as an ocean stilled.’2
 ि ो े ो
क ािप  तात  ध    लोकचे ावलोकनात्।
जीिवते ा  बुभु ा  च  बुभु ोपशमं  गताः॥२॥
kasyāpi tāta dhanyasya loka-ceṣṭāvalokanāt,
jīvitecchā bubhukṣā ca bubhutsopaśamaṁ gatāḥ. (2)
क   – whose; अिप – even; तात – my son; ध    – of the blessed one;
लोकचे ावलोकनात्  – by observing the ways of men; जीिवते ा  –
passion for living; बुभु ा – desire to enjoy; बुभु ा  – hunger to learn
and know; उपशमम्  – has extinguished; गताः  – attained
2. Rare indeed, my son, is that blessed person whose passion for
living, desire to enjoy and hunger to learn and know have been
extinguished by observing the ways of men.
Aṣṭāvakra addresses Janaka, with infinite love as ‘my son’, and
sympathetically exclaims how man, though he lives in this world, all
the time amidst the clamorous sorrows of others, fails to understand
the calamitous life lived by people in selfish passions, in fruitless
tragedies and in barren sorrows. This is happening everywhere
around everyone, all the time, openly, for anyone to see! Yet, the
deluded individual egos refuse to read these words of warning,
written so clearly on the walls of life.
In our identification with the body, mind and intellect, we pant to
gain, to enjoy and to know. The physical personality in us is excited
with its passion for living (jīvita-icchā); the psychological entity in us
is drowned in the desire to enjoy (bubhukṣā); and the intellectual
man in us is ever hungry to learn and to know (bubhutsā).
Rare indeed is that intelligent man who looks around, recognises
the hollowness of life and cultivates his indifference to the world and
its destinies. The majority of us will have to get into the scorching
embrace of māyā and experience its suffocating agonies, repeatedly
many times, in order to realise that the world of sense objects and a
life of sense gratifications cannot satisfy the deeper yearning for a
permanent bliss in us.
In short, a purified mind alone can, in its subtle perception,
discover a smartness in itself to cultivate indifference to the world of
sense pleasures, by intelligently observing the world of tears and
sobs that is screaming at all times, all around him. But alas! the
majority is intellectually blind and deaf. They see, but do not
comprehend, they hear, but do not listen to what they hear.
अिन ं  सव मेवेदं  तापि तयदू िषतम्।
असारं  िन  तं  हेयिमित  िनि    शा ित॥३॥
anityaṁ sarvam-evedaṁ tāpa-tritaya-dūṣitam,
asāraṁ ninditaṁ heyam-iti niścitya śāmyati. (3)
अिन म् – transient; इदं  सव मेव – all this world indeed; ताप  ि तयदू िषतम्
– filthy (vitiated) with the triple misery; असारम् – worthless; िन  तम्  –
contemptible; हेयम्  – rejectable; इित – thus; िनि   – knowing for
certain; शा ित – becomes serene (Man of Wisdom)
3. The Man of Wisdom becomes serene by realising that this world
indeed is transient, filthy with the triple misery, worthless,
contemptible and as something to be rejected.
In the previous verse Aṣṭāvakra mourned at the tragedy of man's
intellectual blindness and deafness. There is sufficient evidence all
around him in life to help him realise that the life of sense pursuits is
doomed for disappointment. Here in this verse, Aṣṭāvakra states
what would be the logical conclusion of an intelligent man, when he
evaluates, without prejudices, the world drama as it is played
everywhere.
The Man of Wisdom becomes serene in this very world, where
the ignorant man suffers from conflicts, contradictions and
confusions in himself. The serenity of the wise man is based upon
his understanding that the world is transient and never permanent, it
is worthless and contemptible and therefore, something to be
discarded. It is full of sorrows, streaming in gushing haste towards
him from three permanent sources.
These triple sources of sorrow are: (a) from the organism – the
body, mind and intellect (ādhyātmika); (b) from the sentient beings
and insentient objects that constitute the world around him
(ādhibhautika); and (c) from the cosmic accidents like floods,
earthquakes and so on, which we generally indicate by the
expression ‘the hand of God’ (ādhidaivika).
कोऽसौ  कालो  वयः  िकं  वा  य      ािन  नो  नृणाम्।
ता ुपे   यथा ा वत   िस  मवा ुयात्॥४॥
ko'sau kālo vayaḥ kiṁ vā yatra dvandvāni no nṛṇām,
tānyupekṣya yathāprāptavartī siddhim-avāpnuyāt. (4)
कः  – what; असौ – that; कालः  – time; वयः  – age; िकम् – what; वा – or;
य  – where;    ािन – pairs of opposites; नो – not; नृणाम्  – of men; तािन
– those; उपे   – abjuring; यथा ा वत  – one who rests contented with
what comes unasked; िस  म्  – perfection; अवा ुयात्  – reaches
4. What is that time or that age, in which the pairs of opposites do
not exist for man? He who, abjuring these, rests contented with what
comes to him unasked, reaches perfection.
The more we revel in the relative plane of joy and sorrow, the more
we will be tossed about between the pairs of opposites. We cannot
say that these will not affect us when we grow old. Age cannot dull,
nor time soften the harsh brutalities and sharp sorrows of the pairs of
opposites. So long as we are living identified with the mind, the ego
will have to suffer the buffeting storms of joy and sorrow, of success
and failure, of likes and dislikes and thousand other such pairs of
opposites. The question of Aṣṭāvakra implies in itself the answer that
never is a time or an age when the pairs of opposites will not affect
an ego entity.
Detachment from the mind is the only way to detach from the
merciless brutalities of the pairs of opposites. He alone can realise
the supreme peace and perfection who has transcended the mind
and, therefore, has abandoned these pairs of opposites. He,
thereafter, lives contented and happy with whatever comes to him
unasked (yathā prāpta-vartī). In such a peaceful man, the ego is
dead; he ‘reaches perfection’. This reminds us of a similar statement
expressed in Mahopaniṣad: ‘Drunk in the nectar of cheerfulness,
those peaceful men, who have reached the sense of contentment,
ever revelling in the Self, are the saintly ones who have already
reached the great state.’3
There cannot be any cessation in the alternate play of joy and
sorrow. The pairs of opposites represent the two poles of the same
factor. As there cannot be a piece of magnet with only one south
pole, so too there cannot be joy without sorrow. This, too, is
beautifully expressed in an eloquent verse: ‘End of joy is sorrow; end
of sorrow is joy; these two are for the living creatures as inescapable
as day and night.’4
In fact, we cannot run away from sorrow without stepping into joy;
nor can we retreat from joy without stepping into sorrow. There
cannot be the crux of a wave without its hollows. Thus, by moving
horizontally, we cannot escape the pairs of opposites. However far
we may go, we cannot escape the waves of the ocean, can we? Yet,
vertically, by rising into a higher plane of Consciousness we can
definitely end the restlessness and exhaustions provided by the pairs
of opposites.
   ोि
नाना  मतं  महष णां  साधूनां  योिगनां  तथा।
   ा  िनव दमाप ः  को  न  शा ित  मानवः॥५॥
nānā mataṁ maharṣīṇāṁ sādhūnāṁ yogināṁ tathā,
dṛṣṭvā nirvedam-āpannaḥ ko na śāmyati mānavaḥ. (5)
नाना – diverse; मतम् – opinions; महष णाम्  – great seers; साधूनाम् – of
sages; योिगनाम्  – of yogins; तथा – as well as;    ा – seeing; िनव दम्  –
indifference; आप ः  – attained; कः  – what; न – not; शा ित – attains
tranquillity; मानवः – man
5. Where is that man, who having observed the diversities of
opinions among the great seers, sages and yogins, and thus
becoming completely indifferent, does not attain tranquillity.
Though the infinite experience is one and the same, when based
upon their direct experience, different intellectual Masters try to
explain the Truth and expound the methods of achieving It, it is
natural that there should be as many different points of view as there
are Masters. Thereafter, mere erudite scholars try to distil the
philosophy of each Master; through these mere intellectual
interpretations, different schools are born. Amidst the logical
arguments arrayed by each school, in support of itself and for the
condemnation of all other schools, an ordinary student must
necessarily get utterly confused. This is unavoidable. Even Śaṅkara
in Vivekacūḍāmaṇi warns us. ‘The wordy arguments are a dense
forest which makes the mind lose its way and wander about. Hence,
intelligent seekers should earnestly set about to realise the illumining
principle of Consciousness – the essential Self.’5
When an intelligent student carefully reads the various
viewpoints, he must necessarily come to the same conclusion that
by words and arguments Truth can never be finally ascertained. A
true student, therefore, becomes indifferent to mere intellectual
learning and logical argumentation. They discuss the nature of the
Truth with their Teachers and among themselves. There is a lot of
difference between arguments and discussions. Exchange of
ignorance is arguments (vāda); and exchange of intelligence is
discussion (vicāra). True seekers, after some amount of study and
discussion must turn indifferent to mere learning and should strive
their best to cultivate and experience the tranquillity of the Self in
themselves.
If these Ᾱcāryas are contradicting among themselves, and each
is championing one school or the other, whom should a seeker follow
as his preceptor, guide or Guru. Aṣṭāvakra explains the qualifications
of a Guru in the following verse –
कृ  ा  मूित प र ानं  चैत    न  िकं  गु ः ।
िनव दसमतायु ा  य ारयित  संसृतेः ॥६॥
kṛtvā mūrti-parijñānaṁ caitanyasya na kiṁ guruḥ,
nirveda-samatā-yuktyā yastārayati saṁsṛteḥ. (6)
कृ  ा  – gaining; मूित प र ानम् – realisation of the true nature; चैत    –
of pure Consciousness; न – not; िकम् – is he not? (interrogative); गु ः
– spiritual guide; िनव दसमतायु ा  – by indifference, equanimity and
logical reasoning; यः  – who; (सः  – he); तारयित – saves himself; संसृतेः
– from saṁsāra
6. He who apprehends the true nature of pure Consciousness, by
complete indifference to the world, by equanimity and by logical
reasoning and thus saves himself from the round of birth and death -
is he not really the spiritual guide ?
The qualification of a great Teacher is not his great knowledge of
Vaidika content. Knowledge of the scriptures (śrotriyatvam) is, no
doubt, an added beauty in a spiritual Teacher. But the essential
qualification for a Teacher is his own inner awakening, accomplished
by the three means – of indifference, of equanimity and logical
reasoning. According to Aṣṭāvakra, the Brahmaniṣṭhatvam, the direct
experience of the Self, is the most valid qualification for a Teacher.
In the Guru-gītā we are advised: ‘Even to reject an incompetent and
an ignorant Guru.’6 ‘He who knows no peace himself, how can he
bring peace into bosom of others.’7
प   भूतिवकारां  ं  भूतमा ान्  यथाथ तः।
त णा  िनमु  ः    प थो  भिव िस॥७॥
paśya bhūta-vikārāṁs-tvaṁ bhūtamātrān yathārthataḥ,
tat-kṣaṇād-bandha-nirmuktaḥ svarūpastho bhaviṣyasi. (7)
प   – see; भूत  िवकारान् – the modifications of the great elements;  म्
– you; भूत  मा ान्  – nothing but the great elements; यथाथ तः – in reality;
तत्   णात्  – at once; ब   िनमु  ः  – free from bondage;   प थः  –
abiding in your own nature; भिव िस – will be
7. Recognising the modifications of the elements as nothing in
reality, but the five elements themselves, you will at once be free
from their bondage, and thus abide in your true nature.
The elements are the fundamental material with which the entire
world of forms is built up. That which is made out of gold cannot be
anything other than gold; similarly, all that is made out of five
elements cannot be anything other than inert and insentient five
elements, expressing in a particular given combination. Taking the
objects of the world as something real, our mind comes to entertain
a desire to acquire, to possess and to enjoy. Thus we create a world
of struggles, riddled with stress and strains. Once we realise that the
entire perceived world is a play of inert and insentient elements,
there is an immediate sense of disenchantment, as all our likes and
dislikes shall, then instantaneously disappear from our hearts.
When the mind is thus quiet, in that tranquil bosom, the pure
Consciousness, undisturbed by thoughts, can be apprehended.
वासना  एव  संसार  इित  सवा   िवमु   ताः।
त ागो  वासना ागात्    थितर   यथा  तथा॥८॥
vāsanā eva saṁsāra iti sarvā vimuñca tāḥ,
tattyāgo vāsanātyāgāt sthitiradya yathā tathā. (8)
वासनाः – desires; एव – surely; संसारः  – world; इित – so; सवा  – all; िवमु 
– renounce; ताः  – those; तत्   ागः  – renunciation of that; वासना ागात्  –
by the giving up of desires;   थितः  – you may live; अ   – now; यथा  तथा
– wherever you may be
8. Desires alone constitute the world; therefore, you please renounce
them all. The giving up of desires is the renunciation of the world.
Now you may live anywhere you like.
Vāsanās are the subtle impulses and tendencies deep in our
personality that determine the emotional and the intellectual profile in
us. Its subtle expression is our ‘desire’ in our intellect. Therefore,
vāsanā is often found translated as ‘desire’, although vāsanā is
essentially the very seed from which a ‘desire’ springs forth. All the
vāsanās put together in an individual, constitute his ‘causal body’8 –
that which determines the nature and quality of that individual's
subtle and gross bodies. The ‘total vāsanās’ of all living creatures
together becomes māyā, and supreme Self expressed through māyā
is God (Īśvara) – who is the very power behind creation, sustenance
and destruction in the cosmos.
These vāsanās experienced as desires, thoughts and actions at
the intellectual, mental and body levels, shackle the ego in a cage of
selfishness and chain him to the wheel of birth and death. These
vāsanās alone constitute the world (vāsanā eva saṁsāraḥ).
Therefore, give up all ‘desires’. Giving up of ‘desires’ is giving up of
saṁsāra.
Now (adya), meaning ‘having renounced all desires, having
sublimated all your vāsanās’, the individual is free to live anywhere
he likes. The outer world can no longer bind him. He is free. Says
Yogavāsiṣṭha: ‘The bondage is the bondage of vāsanās; freedom is
the freedom from vāsanās; you renounce completely the vāsanās
and then renounce the very vāsanā for freedom. You have reached
the goal.’ 9
1 They are space, air, fire, water and earth; their modifications are the objects
of the world.
2 nākṛtena kṛtenārtho na śrutismṛtivibhramaiḥ,
nirmandara ivāmbhodhiḥ sa tiṣṭhati yathāsthitaḥ. – Mahopaniṣad-4.41
3 santoṣāmṛtapānena ye śāntāstṛptimāgatāḥ,
ātmārāmā mahātmānaste mahāpadamāgatāḥ. – Mahopaniṣad-4.35
4 sukhasyānantaraṁ duḥkhaṁ duḥkhasyānantaraṁ sukham,
dve etat hi jantūnāṁ alaṅghyaṁ dinarātrivat.
5 śabdajālaṁ mahāraṇyaṁ cittabhramaṇakāraṇam,
ataḥ prayatnājjñātavyaṁ tattvajñāistatavamātmanaḥ. – Vivekacūḍāmaṇi-60
6 jñāna-hīno gurutyājyo mithyāvādi viḍaṁbakaḥ. – Guru-gītā
7 sva-viśrāntiṁ na jānāti para-śāntiṁ karoti kim? – Guru-gītā - 101
8 kāraṇaśarīra – sarvāḥ śarīrābhimānī (ni) samaṣṭikāraṇaśarīrābhimāni
paramātmā īśvaraḥ.
9 baddho hi vāsanābaddho mokṣaḥ syādvāsanākṣayaḥ,
vāsanāstvaṁ parityajya mokṣārthitvamapi tyaja. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-4.57.19
Chapter – 10
Dispassion
Introduction
Without leaving none can reach; all progress is leaving the present
state and moving to reach a greater goal, to attain a greater purpose.
If ignorance is not left behind, into knowledge we cannot enter.
Where the emotion of anger has left, there alone calmness can
reach. In short, without renunciation of the false we cannot attain the
real. Therefore, in Vedānta, from the Vaidika texts onward we find
the Teachers emphasising the need for the spirit of renunciation
(vairāgya). It is the desires and passions that propel a mind towards
the world, around it and make that mind a slave to its own
environments. Therefore, the principle of renunciation is indicated by
a significant term ‘vairāgya’, literally meaning ‘dispassion’. Where our
attachments to body, mind and intellect have ended through
vairāgya, there we are in the Self.
The previous chapter discussed an emotional attitude of
‘indifference’ to fields of experiences of our limited ego. There the
emphasis was upon the world of objects. In this section defining and
exploring the significance and spirit of dispassion, Aṣṭāvakra is
placing all emphasis upon the seeker’s intellect and its attitude
towards the world around him.
The joys or the destinies of the world are impermanent. A
consummate sense of contentment can reach only a bosom emptied
of all its desires and passions. Ultimately, we must give up even our
anxiety to fulfil the traditionally accepted and recommended great
‘ends of human life’ such as piety (dharma), wealth (artha), desires
(kāma) and anxiety for Liberation (mokṣa).
The Self alone is Real; the universe is false, as false as a
magician’s show. All activities in the pursuit of piety, wealth and
desires are also unreal. The very anxiety for Liberation is an illusion;
therefore, all these are to be renounced. This is the state of supreme
dispassion (parama vairāgya).
The ‘Awareness’ in us that illumines the very ‘ignorance’ in us
and makes us conscious of it, is the supreme Self. Therefore, earlier
it was also indicated that even ‘ignorance’ is unreal, an illusion.
अ ाव   उवाच
िवहाय  वै रणं  काममथ   चानथ सङ् कु लम्।
धम म ेतयोह तुं  सव  ानादरं  कु  ॥१॥
aṣṭāvakra uvāca
vihāya vairiṇaṁ kāmam-arthaṁ cānartha-saṅkulam,
dharmam-apyetayor-hetuṁ sarvatrānādaraṁ kuru. (1)
िवहाय – forsaking; वै रणम्  – enemy; कामम्  – desire; अथ म्  – wealth; च
– and; अनथ सङ् कु लम् – full of mischief; धम म्  – piety; अिप – also; एतयोः
– of these two; हेतुम्  – cause; सव   – everywhere; अनादरम्  –
disregard; कु   – do
Aṣṭāvakra said :
1. Having given up ‘desire’ (kāma) which is the enemy, ‘wealth’
(artha – worldly prosperity) which is attended with mischief, and
‘piety’ (dharma – performance of good deeds) which is the cause of
these two, cultivate indifference to everything.
In the traditional Indian scheme of life, the ṛṣis found out four distinct
destinations enroute to the final achievement of life, one’s total
spiritual emancipation. These four way side stations are piety,
wealth, desires and Liberation; the interpretation of these four goals
at the level of a new initiate in a Hindu family is that he must be
rooted in righteousness (piety) and without contradicting this dharma
he must seek, serve and procure the necessary ‘wealth’ (artha) with
which he must learn to fulfil his honest and just ‘desires’ (kāma). By
thus living a steady life of spiritual discipline he shall become fit for
the study of scriptures and enter into deeper meditation which would
ultimately take him to his final destination, freedom or Liberation
(mokṣa)1.
Aṣṭāvakra is advising here a student, who is on his way to the
portal of Liberation. As the student enters the higher state of
meditation, the Teacher wants the student to give up all these limited
goals of life which, of course, had their initial blessings to contribute
in helping the student to the present state of his awakening. But, in
the last lap of the journey, he cannot accomplish the great leap,
unless he gets tired of all his mental preoccupations with the ideas
and values which were certainly valid in earlier levels of his ego-
consciousness.
To a student of Vedānta, ‘passion’ is his enemy, inasmuch as
they will distract his mind towards sense objects and thus obstruct
his final plunge into deeper meditation, ‘Wealth’ is accompanied by
mental anxieties, both in its acquisition and its preservation. And
‘piety’, here meaning good and noble acts, both secular and sacred,
also is to be given up because they are the cause for conferring
upon him more worldly wealth and sense enjoyments. Later on, we
will be told how even the anxiety for Liberation (mokṣa) is also to be
given up.
This is the state of highest dispassion (vairāgya) which is to be
lived in the meditation seat while transcending the mind, rather than
in the world while communicating with the other members of the
community. This attitude of ‘total-dispassion’ is not a mere physical
act of running away from the enjoyments of objects. This is an
attitude that the student discovers in himself as a result of a healthier
understanding of the world around him.
  े जालवत्  प   िदनािन   ीिण  प   वा।
िम  े धनागारदारदायािदस दः॥२॥
svapnendrajālavat paśya dināni trīṇi pañca vā,
mitra-kṣetra-dhanāgāra-dāra-dāyādi-sampadaḥ. (2)
  इ जालवत्  – like a dream or like a magician’s show; प  – see;
िदनािन – days;  ीिण  – three; प  – five; वा – or; िम  – friends;  े  –
lands; धन – wealth; आगार – house; दार – wives; दाय  आिद  स दः –
presents and other such objects of fortune
2. Look upon friends, lands, wealth, houses, wives, presents, and
other such objects of fortune as a dream or as a magician's show,
lasting only a few days – just three or five.
As a means of rising above the habitual mental fascinations to live in
the pursuit of the traditional ‘goals of life’, hinted in the above verse,
here Aṣṭāvakra helps the student in re-educating his view of life. In
this new understanding, the student can independently come to
recognise the hollowness of his generally accepted ‘aims of
existence’, of his relations, of wealth and of all other objects with
which we try to enrich our lives and build up our security in
existence. All are really illusions of the mind, as insubstantial and
false as the dream objects or as the world of apparent fantasies
created by a magician’s wand! They have only a temporary
existence. The ephemeral nature of the world of plurality is indicated
here by saying: ‘Lasting only a few days – just three or five’.
Constantly keeping this view of the fields of experiences, the ego
shall cultivate a larger amount of ‘dispassion’ (vairāgya) for these
uncertain factors and their insignificant rewards. The more the
student recognises the transitoriness of the joys of achievements in
the world of plurality, the stronger shall grow in him his ‘dispassion’
for them.
य   य   भवे ृ ा  संसारं  िव    त   वै।
 ौढवैरा माि    वीततृ ः  सुखी  भव॥३॥
yatra yatra bhavet-tṛṣṇā saṁsāraṁ viddhi tatra vai,
prauḍha-vairāgyam-āśritya vītatṛṣṇaḥ sukhī bhava. (3)
य   य  – wherever; भवेत्  – is; तृ ा – desire; संसारम् – world; िव   –
know; त  – there; वै – indeed;  ौढवैरा म् – strong dispassion; आि  
– adopting; वीततृ ः  – free from desire; सुखी – happy; भव – be
3. Know that to be the world wherever there is desire. Cultivating
strong dispassion, go beyond the desire and be happy.
Our ṛṣis and Masters are never tired of repeating this idea which is a
realised Truth, a recognised rational fact. If we are not able to stand
away from the enchantments of our desires then we would
pathetically pursue for their fulfilment, thereby making life a
miserable tragedy for ourselves and for others. In Bhāgavata
describing Piṅgalā, the prostitute, the ṛṣi says: ‘Desire indeed is the
supreme source of sorrow; desirelessness the source of extreme
happiness. Just as in the case of Piṅgalā when she destroyed her
passion and anxiety for men, she slept peacefully.’2
In Yogavāsiṣṭha also we find an elaborate metaphor painted in
words to drive home the very same truth of life: ‘The individual ego,
riding in the chariot of the mind, pulled by the horses of sense
organs, wanders all over the world, driven by its charioteer desire.’3
 ो ो ो े
तृ ामा ा को  ब   ाशो  मो   उ ते।
भवासंस  मा ेण   ा  तुि मु  मु  ः॥४॥
tṛṣṇā-mātrātmako bandhas-tannāśo mokṣa ucyate,
bhavāsaṁsakti-mātreṇa prāpti-tuṣṭir-muhurmuhuḥ. (4)
तृ ा  मा   आ कः – consisting of desire alone; ब ः  – bondage; तत्
नाशः  – destruction of that; मो ः  – Liberation; उ ते – is called; भव
असंस    मा ेण  – through the non-attachment of the world alone;
 ा  तुि ः  – joy from attainment; मु र्  मु ः  – constantly
4. Desire is the soul of bondage and its destruction is said to be
Liberation. By non-attachment to the world alone does one attain the
constant bliss of the realisation of the Self.
Where desires have ended, thoughts have ceased, the mind is
halted. Where there is no mind, there cannot be any ego, the
experiencer of the world of plurality and its sorrows. Therefore,
‘dispassion’ (vairāgya) is the only sure and efficient way to reach the
highest state of Bliss.
Mahopaniṣad expresses the same idea: ‘Sensuous desires alone
are bondage; their renunciation is called Liberation.’4
 मेक ेतनः  शु ो  जडं  िव मस था।
अिव ािप  न  िकि  ा  का  बुभु ा  तथािप  ते॥५॥
tvam-ekaś-cetanaḥ śuddho jaḍaṁ viśvam-asat-tathā,
avidyāpi na kiñcit-sā kā bubhutsā tathāpi te. (5)
 म्  – you; एकः – one; चेतनः  – intelligence; शु ः  – pure; जडम् –
material (inert); िव म्  – universe; असत्  – non-existence; तथा – and;
अिव ा – ignorance; अिप – also; न – not; िकि त्  – anything; सा – that;
का – what; बुभु ा – desire to know; तथािप – yet; ते – your
5. You are the one, pure Intelligence. The universe is inert and
unreal. Ignorance also is non-existent. What then can you yet desire
to know?
By the four earlier verses the Teacher indicated to us, in a language
of negation, what are the things to be renounced. Here, Aṣṭāvakra
takes a positive stand and tries to indicate the student's very spiritual
centre, to identify with which, is to reject everything else.
The essential nature of being is the Self and the Self is
Consciousness. Everything else is inert and functions only in the
borrowed ‘light’ of the Self. In the midst of illusory, inert world of
names and forms, the Self alone is Real. In the ‘light’ of pure
Intelligence, there cannot be the darkness of ‘ignorance’. After
making this statement the Teacher asks, ‘What more should one
intelligently understand?’ This is all to be understood from the study
of the scriptures. To a practical student, who is ready to do sādhanā
and move towards the experience of the Self, no other hair-splitting
argumentations and endless logical reasonings are really necessary.
Aṣṭāvakra advises the student to give up his intellectual gluttony,
his ever-growing hunger to study, to discuss, to argue and to
investigate. Mahopaniṣad pointedly indicates what exactly is to be
realised: ‘Neither I, as an individual, nor others really exist. Unsullied
Brahman am I. Thus he who sees from a point between Existence
and non-existence, the Consciousness that illumines both the Real
and unreal, he alone sees the Reality, the Self.’5
रा ं  सुताः  कल ािण  शरीरािण  सुखािन  च।
संस  ािप  न ािन  तव  ज िन  ज िन॥६॥
rājyaṁ sutāḥ kalatrāṇi śarīrāṇi sukhāni ca,
saṁsaktasyāpi naṣṭāni tava janmani janmani. (6)
 ि ी ि
रा म्  – kingdom; सुताः – sons; कल ािण  – wives; शरीरािण  – bodies;
सुखािन – pleasures; च  – and; संस    – attached; अिप – though;
न ािन – have been lost; तव – you; ज िन  ज िन – life after life
6. Kingdoms, sons, wives, bodies and pleasures have all been lost to
you, life after life, even though you were attached to them.
In the previous verse a highly metaphysical and philosophical
argument was given. The student was shown that he is essentially
nothing but the Self, the Ᾱtman.
‘Other than the gross, subtle and causal bodies, the Witness of
the three states of waking, dream and deep sleep, of the nature of
Existence-Knowledge-Bliss this, which remains in our personality,
that is the Self, the Ᾱtman.’ This has been the exhaustive definition
of the spiritual centre in man as given out by Masters of Vedānta.6
Therefore, what has he to do with the inert and unreal world and with
the non-existent ‘ignorance’? Here, however, Aṣṭāvakra gives us a
very rational reason which even a common man can understand.
‘Life after life, we must have sought to acquire, to possess and to
enjoy kingdoms, sons, wives, bodies and pleasure’; yet, in every life
we had ultimately lost whatever we had. So, it is intelligence not to
get ourselves entrapped by the fascinations for these things,
because in spite of our attachment, it is their very nature that they
must perish. An intelligent man should not therefore, fall a ready
victim to such a repeated hallucination.
अलमथ न  कामेन  सुकृ तेनािप  कम णा।
ए ः  संसारका ारे  न  िव ा मभू नः॥७॥
alam-arthena kāmena sukṛtenāpi karmaṇā,
ebhyaḥ saṁsāra-kāntāre na viśrāntam-abhūn-manaḥ. (7)
अलम्  – no deed; अथ न – with wealth; कामेन – with desire-fulfilment;
कम णा सुकृ तेन – with pious deed; अिप – and; ए ः  – from these; संसार
 े ि
का ारे – in the wilderness of the world; न – not; िव ा म्  – reposed;
अभूत्  – was; मनः  – mind
7. Enough of wealth, desires and pious deeds! In the wilderness of
the world, the mind did not find repose in these.
Repeating the idea, which he had mentioned earlier, Aṣṭāvakra
insists that the pursuit of ‘wealth’, ‘desire’ and ‘piety’ is indeed
unrewarding from the standpoint of the highest goal. Enough with
such pursuits. With ‘wealth’, mind discovers various avenues of
dissipation. ‘Desire’, its fulfilment has never brought ever a complete
contentment to any human mind; desires only multiply with each
fulfilment! ‘Pious deeds’ are the very cause that have provided the
seeker with his present wealth and desire fulfilments in the world. In
the jungles of world’s activities these have never brought peace and
repose to the mind. Thus realising, cultivate ‘dispassion’ (vairāgya).
कृ तं  न  कित  ज ािन  कायेन  मनसा  िगरा।
दुः खमायासदं  कम   तद ा ुपर ताम्॥८॥
kṛtaṁ na kati janmāni kāyena manasā girā,
duḥkham-āyāsadaṁ karma tad-adyāpy-uparamyatām. (8)
कृ तम् – undertaken; न – not; कित – how many; ज ािन – births; कायेन
– with the body; मनसा – with the mind; िगरा – with speech; दुः खम्  –
painful; आयासदम्  – exacting; कम  – work (you); तत्  – so; अ   – today;
अिप – at least; उपर ताम्  – cease
8. For how many births have you not undertaken hard and painful
work with your body, mind and speech? Hence, cease them, at least
today!
Gītā clearly points out in its scientific analysis of action how tāmasika
actions performed with utter selfishness bring but sorrows to oneself
and to others. The rājasika and sāttvika activities also, when they are
unselfish, can reward us with apparent joys. But they, too, are within
the category of saṁsāra and, therefore, unreal and painful. No
doubt, selfless dedicated activities would increase the sāttvika
content in our inner equipment and a mind can then come to
experience a greater amount of tranquillity and peace. With a mind
so purified through selfless, dedicated, pious actions, the study of
the scriptures and meditations are possible. The grosser rewards of
activities are certainly impermanent and at their best unsatisfactory
to an enlightened man.
All our best actions undertaken so diligently and so laboriously
with the exacting efficiency have ultimately brought about only
sorrows, relieved with patches of impermanent joys!
When this discriminative understanding has dawned in his mind,
the student becomes a true spiritual seeker and addressing such a
seeker the Teacher here says: ‘Hence, cease them at least today’.
In Yogavāsiṣṭha, we read a similar condemnation of the worldly
activities for mature spiritual students: ‘Even after enjoying
thousands of years the basest of sensuous enjoyments, from the
Creator to a tuft of grass, no one has ever reached contentment.
Having ruled over vast kingdoms for long years, having enjoyed a
harem of wives, having destroyed all enemies around the world,
what is the unique thing that one can gain? Laboriously struggle to
gain That, having gained which, there is nothing more to gain. To
gain This, continuously pant and struggle.’7
1 dharma, artha, kāma and Mokṣa.
2 āśā hi paramaṁ duḥkhaṁ nairāśyaṁ paramaṁ sukham,
yathā sañchidya kāntāśāṁ sukhaṁ suṣvāpa piṅgalā. – Bhāgavata – 11.8.44
3 manoratha rathārūḍhaṁ yuktamindriyavājibhiḥ,
bhrāmyatyeva jagatkṛtsnaṁ tṛṣṇāsārathicoditam. – Yogavāsiṣṭha
4 bhogecchāmātrako bandhaḥ tattyāgo mokṣa ucyate – Mahopaniṣad-5.97
5 nāhaṁ na cānyadastīha brahmaivāsmi nirāmayam,
itthaṁ sadasatormadhyādyaḥ yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati. – Mahopaniṣad-5.69
6 sthūlasūkṣmakāraṇaśarīrād-vyatirikto'vasthātrayasākṣī
saccidānandasvarūpo yastiṣṭhati saḥ ātmā. – Tattvabodha
7 bhuktvā varṣasahasrāṇi durbhogapaṭalīmimām,
ābrahmastambaparyantaṁ na tṛptirupajāyate.
sāmrājyaṁ suciraṁ kṛtvā tathā bhuktvā vadhūgaṇam,
bhuṅktvā parabalānyuccaiḥ kimapūrvamavāpyate.
prāptena yena no bhūyaḥ prāptavyamavaśiṣyate,
tatprāptau yatnamātiṣṭhet kaṣṭyāpi he ceṣṭayā.
– Yogavāsiṣṭha-Nirvāṇa Prakaraṇa

Chapter – 11
Self As Pure Intelligence
Introduction
In this chapter, the Supreme is indicated as pure Intelligence (cid-
rūpa). It is universal and all-inclusive. There is nothing other than It.
Therefore, It is ever at rest, serene and tranquil. No conflict is ever
possible in the Self. The universe shines in the ‘light’ of the pure Self.
It ever revels in Its own aloneness (kaivalya). When an intelligent
ego rediscovers his identity with this great Self, he no longer gets
himself involved in his external worldly activities.
The Gītā doctrine of ‘inaction in action’ has been totally accepted
by Aṣṭāvakra and he expounds it through the chapters of his song.
This chapter can be considered as Jñāna-aṣṭakam – a hymn to pure
Knowledge, in eight verses. True and enduring peace can be only in
the state of Selfhood. Therefore, the preparatory understanding for
gaining Self-realisation are here discussed. In fact, this short chapter
is full of the qualities of a Man of Realisation. It explains the nature of
the perfect man and also indicates the sādhanā to be pursued by the
seekers to awake into the highest spiritual awareness of the
universal infinite Self. Until our perception of the world around is
through a clearer perspective, our clinging attachments and mental
concern for the world of happenings cannot be ended; there cannot
be sufficient inner equipoise for subtler meditations.
Here are the eight lessons for healthier understanding of the
world and its play which will bring in peace and tranquillity into the
bosom of the seekers –
अ ाव   उवाच
भावाभाविवकार    भावािदित  िन यी।
िनिव कारो  गत  ेशः  सुखेनैवोपशा ित॥१॥
aṣṭāvakra uvāca
bhāvābhāva-vikāraśca svabhāvād-iti niścayī,
nirvikāro gata-kleśaḥ sukhenaivopaśāmyati. (1)
भाव  अभाव  िवकारः  – change in the form of existence and destruction;
च – and;  भावात्  – from inherent nature; इित – thus; िन यी – one who
has understood with certitude; िनिव कारः  – unperturbed; गत  ेशः  –
free from pains; सुखेन – easily; एव – indeed; उपशा ित – finds peace
Aṣṭāvakra said:
1. He who has understood with certitude that change in the form of
existence and destruction is inherent in things, he becomes
unperturbed and free from pains and easily finds his peace.
Intelligent observation with scientific detachment alone can crack the
mystery bound shell of life. Mind and body will act only according to
our intellectual understanding and convictions, that one has
cultivated in himself. In this chapter Aṣṭāvakra gives eight lessons in
re-educating the intellectual values entertained by the student.
During this discourse, the sage paints the inner personality of a Man
of Perfection. Aṣṭāvakra invites us to enter into the intellect of a Man
of Self-realisation and he makes us see things as the wise man
does.
Through the study of the scriptures and through independent
reflections upon the pregnant declarations of the great ṛṣis of the
Upaniṣads, the student must grow into a deep conviction of the
spiritual viewpoints of the world around him. A mere information
gathering intellect cannot progress on the spiritual journey; nor, can
a vague understanding really help us much. The world, as it is, must
be understood with an unshakable certitude that can change the
very colour and texture of our view of life and of our mental,
intellectual and physical relationships with others.
He who has understood with certitude that existence and
destruction are the inherent nature of the things that constitute the
universe of change, is the one who can immediately discover a great
amount of tranquillity in his bosom. No intelligent man will sit on the
seashore and complain at the rising and the disappearing of the
waves; he knows that this is the inherent nature of the waves. No
one will complain at the rising and the setting of the sun each day,
because all of us know that this is the inherent nature of the sun.
Similarly, a student of philosophy comes to understand with
certitude that, like bubbles in the waters, everything in the universe
must constantly keep on changing. His mind, therefore, will not any
longer revolt against this inherent nature of the world around him.
When this evanescent nature of things is realised, we cannot get
ourselves any longer deeply attached to them. Naturally mental
peace must come to flood the bosom of such a seeker.
Yogavāsiṣṭha thunders: ‘These endless thought eruptions, their
rising and disappearance, are ever for your terrible sorrows and
never, never for your happiness.’1
ई रः  सव िनमा ता  नेहा   इित  िन यी।
अ ग िलतसवा शः  शा ः   ािप  न  स ते॥२॥
īśvaraḥ sarva-nirmātā nehānya iti niścayī,
antargalita-sarvāśaḥ śāntaḥ kvāpi na sajjate. (2)
ई  ि  
ई रः  – God (Self); सव िनमा ता – Creator of all; न – not; इह – here; अ ः
– other; इित – this; िन यी – one who has understood with certitude;
अ ग िलतसवा शः  – with all desires melted away; शा ः  – calm;   - अिप –
in anything whatsoever; न – not; स ते – is attached
2. He who has understood with certitude that God (Self) is the
Creator of all and there is none else here, becomes calm with all his
inner desires melted away. He is no longer attached to anything
whatsoever.
If from the great Reality, the world of plurality is projected, the
created world cannot be other than the material from which it has
been created. Thus, the Creator and the created are not two
separate factors. The created universe is only yet another form of
the Creator. The ornaments made of gold cannot be other than gold.
Thought disturbances in the mind and the consequent gross
perceptions of the outer universe are all existing in the Self
illuminated by Its light of Consciousness. The student, who has
understood this with certitude, becomes calm, for his desires get
melted away. What is there for him to desire that is other than his
own Self? Since, there are no desires, there cannot be any
attachment for him, as there is nothing other than himself, for him to
covet and to feel entangled with.
In these verses we must not forget that we are given a chance to
peep at the world through the intellect of a Man of Realisation!
आपदः  स दः  काले  दैवादेवेित  िन यी।
तृ ः    थे  यो  िन ं  न  वा ित  न  शोचित॥३॥
āpadaḥ sampadaḥ kāle daivād-eveti niścayī,
tṛptaḥ svasthendriyo nityaṁ na vāñchati na śocati. (3)
 े ै
आपदः  – misfortune; स दः  – fortune; काले – in time; दैवात्  – through
the effects of past actions; एव – certainly; इित – thus; िन यी – one
who has understood with certitude; तृ ः  – contented;   थे  यः  –
with all the senses well-controlled; िन म् – ever; न – not; वा ित –
desires; न – not; शोचित – grieves
3. He who has understood with certitude that misfortune and fortune
come in their own time, through the effects of past actions, becomes
ever contented and has all his senses well under control. He neither
desires nor grieves.
It is all a question of our understanding. Even amidst good fortunes
there are people who are in the habit of worrying and growing
anxious. There are others who even in the midst of calamitous days
of repeated misfortune discover an inner peace born out of
unshaken faith.
Fortune and misfortune that happen today in our lives are the
rewards and punishments of our own past actions. When this is
understood with certitude, man learns to live in contentment,
heroically facing whatsoever happens to him in life. He no longer
strives or plans for his sense gratifications; his senses are ever held
in check. He desires nothing. He knows not how to grieve over
things that had perished in his embrace. Desire is for what is not
attained and grief is generally over what is lost. Both these are
happenings according to the rhythm set by our own actions in the
past. In this knowledge he discovers an undisturbed peace and
unperturbed contentment. This is aptly expressed in Yogavāsiṣṭha as
follows: ‘Let misfortune come or good fortune come. A true sage
never leaves his divine peaceful nature (Self). Just as the milky
ocean, in spite of being churned by the Mandāra mountain, still
retains its white colour.’2
By lifting the mind to a higher vision alone can we withdraw it
from its natural habitat consisting of sense objects. This is the
exercise advised by the Bhagavad-gītā also: ‘Little by little let him
attain quietude by the intellect held in firmness; having made the
mind established in Self, let him not think of anything.’3
Kaṭhopaniṣad reinforces this idea when it declares: ‘When all the
desires in the heart are emptied, then the mortal man gains
immortality and therein apprehends Brahman.’4
सुखदुः खे  ज मृ  ू  दैवादेवेित  िन यी।
सा ादश   िनरायासः  कु व  िप  न  िल ते॥४॥
sukha-duḥkhe janma mṛtyū daivād-eveti niścayī,
sādhyādarśī nirāyāsaḥ kurvannapi na lipyate. (4)
सुख  दुः खे – in happiness and sorrow; ज मृ  ू – birth and death; दैवात्
– due to the effects of past actions; एव – certainly; इित – thus; िन यी
– one who has understood with certitude; सा ादश  – not seeking
after the goals of life; िनरायासः  – free from efforts; कु व न्  – doing; अिप –
even; न – not; िल ते – tainted
4. He who has understood with certitude that happiness and sorrow,
birth and death, are all due to the effects of past actions, does no
more seek after the ordinary goals of life. He becomes free from
efforts. He is not attached (tainted) even though engaged in action.
When the understanding has dawned that our present life and all its
achievements and sorrows are all effects of the past, he has,
thereafter, no more any definite goal to be reached in life except the
infinite Self, which is the substratum for the entire world and for all
the happenings in it. Naturally, he becomes free from all anxieties
and efforts. In short, he does not function as an individualised
separate entity; the ‘ego’ in him dies. Therefore, ‘he is not attached
(tainted) even though engaged in action.’
This idea of ‘actionlessness in action’ is the doctrine of the
Bhagavad-gītā which Aṣṭāvakra accepts root and branch: ‘He who is
devoted to the path of Action, whose mind is quite pure, who has
conquered the ego, who has subdued his senses, who realises his
Self as the Self in all beings, though acting, he is not tainted.’5
Egocentric actions alone can leave their impression upon our
personality and thus condition our future thoughts and actions. This
is how we get involved in our actions. Mind resting in Brahman and
in a spirit of utter dedication to It, when an individual functions, such
activities bring about, according to Gītā, an exhaustion of the existing
vāsanās. For one who is revelling in Brahman, actions are
spontaneous expression of the Divine in the world of beings. He acts
not; he is acted through by the universal law.
िच या  जायते  दुः खं  ना थेहेित  िन यी।
तया  हीनः  सुखी  शा ः  सव    गिलत ृहः॥५॥
cintayā jāyate duḥkhaṁ nānyatheheti niścayī,
tayā hīnaḥ sukhī śāntaḥ sarvatra galitaspṛhaḥ. (5)
िच या – through anxiety; जायते – is produced; दुः खम् – sorrow; न –
not; अ था - otherwise; इह – here; इित – thus; िन यी – one who has
understood with certitude; तया  हीनः  – free from that; सुखी – happy;
शा ः  – peaceful; सव   – everywhere; गिलत ृहः  – with desires melted
away
5. He who has understood with certitude that it is anxiety and nothing
else that brings sorrow in the world, becomes free from it and is
happy and peaceful everywhere with his desires melted away.
Sorrow itself is a mental condition of agitation; the more the
agitations, the more the sorrow. Where agitations have ceased, mind
has become calm and this alone is the condition of happiness.
Therefore, anxiety is that which breeds the sorrows of life. One, who
learns to leave all anxieties regarding the future and lives in utter
contentment rooted in one’s own understanding, discovers instant
happiness and peace. All his desires melt away as he is no more
hoping to discover happiness through the gratification of any desire
in himself.
Anxieties can raise storms in the mind only when one allows
one’s mind to get identified with the world of objects outside. Soon
the mind cultivates an attachment with the objects. That attachment
intensifies to crystallise into a desire for those objects. The desire
poisons the mind and it starts bleeding with its endless sorrows.
Again, we must remember that we are having here, a free show
sitting in the intellect of the wise man, sharing his views of the world
throbbing around him.
नाहं  देहो  न  मे  देहो  बोधोऽहिमित  िन यी।
कै व िमव  सं ा ो  न   र कृ तं  कृ तम्॥६॥
nāhaṁ deho na me deho bodho'ham-iti niścayī,
kaivalyam-iva saṁprāpto na smaratyakṛtaṁ kṛtam. (6)
न – not; अहम्  – I; देहः  – body; न – not; मे – my; देहः  – body; बोधः  –
pure Intelligence; अहम्  – I; इित – thus; िन यी – one who has
understood with certitude; कै व म्  – the state of aloneness; इव – as
if; सं ा ः  – attained; न – not;  रित – remembers; अकृ तम्  – what is
not done; कृ तम्  – what is done
6. ‘I am not the body, nor is the body mine, I am pure Intelligence’ –
he who has understood this with certitude, does no longer remember
what he ‘has done’ or what he ‘has not done’, as if he has attained
the state of aloneness (kaivalya).
When a seeker has mentally rejected the ‘not-Self’ and has
ascertained his own nature as the Self even during the intense
moments of his sādhanā, he unconsciously admits to a flood of
peace filling him, in which he apparently forgets to worry over what
he ‘has done,’ or what he has ‘not yet done’. To worry over what has
been done, is the habit of the human mind, to drag back from the
dead past his memories to muddy the pool of the present. Some not
only get worried with regrets of their past, but also are anxious for
their future and this is indicated by the term here ‘what has not yet
been done’.
It is a human mind’s habit to worry over actions both committed
and omitted. When the student has gone through the practice, that
has been advised here, he comes to discover within himself such a
peaceful state of utter contentment, that therein he learns to live the
dynamic present, supremely happy and peaceful and Aṣṭāvakra
adds: ‘As though he has reached kaivalya – the supreme state of the
aloneness of the Self’.
Kaṭhopaniṣad also advises the same. It guarantees and assures
the same condition of inner peace and aloneness in the following
words : ‘When the five organs of knowledge are at rest together with
the mind, and when the intellect ceases functioning (becomes calm),
that they call the highest state.’6
The ideas of ‘I’ and ‘my’ are the expressions of the ego, and
when the deeper understanding dawns in a seeker, ‘I am not the
body, nor is the body mine’, the egocentric subject ends and the ego
awakes to the realisation of its divine Selfhood. Sings Mahopaniṣad:
‘The two terms – bondage and Liberation are nothing but the tyranny
of mineness and the total rejection of this mineness; by the sense of
mineness, the creature gets bound and is liberated when the sense
of mineness has ended.’7
आ    पय   महमेवेित  िन यी।
िनिव क ः  शुिचः  शा ः   ा ा ा िविनवृ तः॥७॥
ābrahma-stamba-paryantam-ahameveti niścayī,
nirvikalpaḥ śuciḥ śāntaḥ prāptāprāpta-vinirvṛtaḥ. (7)
  
आ         पय   म्  – from the Creator down to a tuft of grass; अहम्  –
I; एव – indeed (am); इित – thus; िन यी – one who has understood with
certitude; िनिव क ः  – free from all fluctuations (oscillations of
thought); शुिचः  – pure; शा ः  – serene;  ा   अ ा   िविनवृ तः –
withdrawn from what is attained and what is not attained
7. ‘I am indeed in everything from the Creator down to a tuft of grass’
– he who has understood this with certitude becomes free from all
thought oscillations; pure and serene, he withdraws from what is
attained and what is not attained.
Limited mind alone gets agitated. The more the limitations, the
greater the agitations. The mind completely relinquished and free
from all identifications is the mind that has no agitations and stilled
mind is the supreme Self.
When the limited identifications of the ego have been
transcended and with certainty when the seeker has understood, ‘I
am indeed the all-pervading essence behind all names and forms’,
he is beyond his mind and, therefore, no more can the oscillations of
the mind (vikalpa) disturb him. The term ‘nirvikalpa’, as applied to
samādhi is defined by Bhartṛhari as: ‘An exclusive concentration
upon the one entity, without distinct and separate Consciousness of
the knower, the known and knowledge and even without Self-
consciousness’. It is strange, but true, that this familiar term
‘nirvikalpa’ taken up and popularised by Patañjali, is not at all used
either in any of the principal Upaniṣads nor in the Bhagavad-gītā.
However, Aṣṭāvakra freely makes use of it.
नाना य िमदं  िव ं  न  िकि िदित  िन यी।
िनवा सनः    ू ित मा ो  न  िकि िदव  शा ित॥८॥
nānāścaryam-idaṁ viśvaṁ na kiñcid-iti niścayī,
nirvāsanaḥ sphūrtimātro na kiñcid-iva śāmyati. (8)
   ि
नाना – manifold; आ य म्  – marvellous; इदम्  – this; िव म् – universe; न
– not; िकि त्  – anything; इित  – this; िन यी – one who has understood
with certitude; िनवा सनः  – free from desire;   ू ित मा ः  – pure
Intelligence; न – not; िकि त्  – anything; इव – as if; शा ित – finds
peace
8. He who has understood with certitude that this manifold and
marvellous universe is nothing (unreal), becomes desireless pure
Intelligence. He finds peace, as if nothing exists.
In this concluding verse, the negation becomes so complete and
total that the student in his reflection understands that the world of
plurality as interpreted to him, through his body, mind and intellect,
has no existence of its own. Having thus realised the illusory nature
of the world, he becomes desireless to possess and to enjoy the
world of objects outside. Without desires the subtle body withers
away, as there are no more thoughts in it; vāsanās have already
exhausted or else desires would have sprung up; thus causal body
also has ceased. Naturally, the ego rediscovers that it is, in its true
nature, pure Intelligence alone, the Self. He finds absolute peace in
the objectless awareness, at once infinite and marvellous.
1 imā vicitrāḥ kalanāḥ bhāvābhāvamayātmikāḥ,
duḥkhāyaiva tavogrāya na sukhāya kadācana. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-5.52.12
2 athāpadaṁ prāpya susaṁpadaṁ vā mahāmatiḥ svaprakṛtaṁ svabhāvam,
jahāti no mandaravellito'pi śauklyaṁ yathā kṣīramayāmburāśiḥ.
– Yogavāsiṣṭha-5.93.98
3 śanaiḥ śanairūparamedbuddhyā dhṛtigṛhītayā,
ātmasaṁsthaṁ manaḥ kṛtvā na kiñcidapi cintayet. – Bhagavad-gītā-6.25
4 yadā sarve paramucyante kāmā ye'sya hṛdi śritāḥ,
atha martyo'mṛto bhavatyatra brahma samaśnute. – Kaṭhopaniṣad-2.3.14
5 yogayukto viśuddhātmā vijitātmā jitendriyaḥ,
sarvabhūtātmabhūtātmā kurvannapi na lipyate. – Bhagavad-gītā-5.7
6 yadā pañcāvatiṣṭhante jñānāni manasā saha,
buddhiśca na viceṣṭate tāmāhuḥ paramāṁ gatim. – Kaṭhopaniṣad-2.6.10
7 dve pade bandhamokṣākhyaṁ nirmameti mameti ca,
mameti badhyate janturnirmameti vimucyate. – Mahopaniṣad-4.72

Chapter 12
How to Abide in the Self
Introduction
In the earlier chapter (11), considered as an eight versed hymn to
the glory of the Self, Sage Aṣṭāvakra, with a rare spontaneity of
inspiration, completes a vivid and pulsating picture of the intellectual
attitude of a Man of Perfection towards happenings in the objective
world and towards his own subjective intellectual reactions to them.
Together with that, this chapter gives the view of the world from the
silent and quiet bosom of a Man of Realisation.
Vedānta being a subjective science, worldly descriptions given
out by Masters have no purposeful validity in themselves unless they
are considered as check posts, in which the student must search his
own within. The ideas expounded in the philosophy of Vedānta are to
be re-read and re-heard by the student himself in his own bosom.
Janaka as a perfect disciple recognises the deep significance of
his Teacher's words. In this section the royal saint confesses how he
has, in stages, come to abide in himself, in the blissful Self.
The steps and the stages by which he ascended to this altitude of
spiritual experience is being mapped in detail in these eight verses of
this section.
Through the ideas provided in this section, when we observe the
Man of Perfection in Janaka, continuing his onerous responsibilities
of administering his kingdom and apparently revelling in the luxury
and showy sensuousness of his court, we shall gain the glimpse of
an unattached mind playing in the world, unaffected by the
happenings around it; ‘like a lotus leaf in water’ (padma-patram-iva-
ambhasā) is a famous analogy used in the context by the Bhagavad-
gītā.
Emptying the mind of all the thought disturbances within is the
process to attain the spiritual life. To quieten and still even the last
traces of thought disturbance in the mind is the accomplishment of
the higher meditations. This is gained, in different stages, by sealing
off the different sources from which these disturbances gurgle into
our bosom. These processes of illumination are exhaustively
indicated in these eight verses of this section.
जनक  उवाच
कायकृ  ासहः  पूव   ततो  वा   रासहः।
अथ  िच ासह  ादेवमेवाहमा  थतः॥१॥
janaka uvāca
kāya-kṛtyāsahaḥ pūrvaṁ tato vāg-vistarāsahaḥ,
atha cintāsahas-tasmād-evame-vāham-āsthitaḥ. (1)
कायकृ  असहः – intolerant of physical action; पूव म् – at first; ततः –
then; वा   रअसहः – intolerant of extensive speech; अथ – then;
िच ाअसहः – intolerant of thought; त ात् – therefore; एवम् – thus; एव
– indeed; अहम् – I; आ  थतः – abide
Janaka said:
1. I became intolerant first of physical action, then of extensive
speech and then of thought. Thus do I, therefore, abide in myself.
Activities spring forth mainly from three sources – physical, oral and
mental. Earlier seekers are advised to discipline their physical
activities, their speech and their thoughts in such a way that all of
them are geared to the thoughts of the Divine and thereby the
seeker is helped to turn his attention away from its usual
preoccupations with the world of sense gratifications.
Religious activities like yajña, pūjā and so on and dedicated
secular activities as social work, political work and so on, are the
methods by which the physical activities are divinised. Similarly,
singing the glories of the Lord, reading the scriptures aloud,
repeating an inspiring mantra according to the technique of japa, are
all accepted methods by which speech can be disciplined to turn
towards the spiritual path. Again, thoughts which are generally
running out into the world of sense objects, when turned to
contemplate upon the Lord of the universe, constitute the thought
discipline for a strict spiritual life.
When a student, having disciplined his body, speech and mind,
practises meditation for long, he slowly climbs into the higher scales
in meditation. Therein, he discovers that even these prayerful
exercises of the body and the study of the scriptures at the speech
level, and all the conscious attempts at concentration in the practice
of meditation at the intellectual level, are all distractions for him in his
higher flights into subtler meditation.
In this spiritual autobiography of Janaka, the royal-saint
confesses that he could no longer stand distractions caused by his
dedicated physical activities, by prayers, by silent japa, and even by
contemplation. He gave them all up. And he says, ‘Thus do I,
therefore, abide in myself’.
This is no blasphemy. The earlier sādhanās such as services of
mankind and rituals, kīrtana and pūjās, practice of truthfulness and
self-control, concentration and contemplation and so on, are all of
immense significance to the seeker, because they, in their totality,
shall lead the student to the take off pad for higher meditation. At this
stage, in his subtle vision, he gains convincing glimpses of the
oneness of the divine Self everywhere. As Yogavāsiṣṭha says: ‘The
body is nothing but the effects of the past actions; and the mind that
prompts the body is itself dynamised by the intelligent-ego (jīva); and
this jīva is itself the expression of the Lord; and this Lord is the
manifestation of the Ᾱtman, the Self. In short, in one word, we say
everything is the one Śiva.’ Moments of such understanding are
moments when the earlier paths of sādhanā are themselves
insufferable mental distractions.1
 ी भावेन  श ादेर    ेन  चा नः।
िव ेपैका  दय  एवमेवाहमा  थतः॥२॥
prītyabhāvena śabdāder-adṛśyatvena cātmanaḥ,
vikṣepaikāgra-hṛdaya evam-evāham-āsthitaḥ. (2)
 ीितअभावेन – for want of satisfaction (attachment); श ादेः  – of sound
and so on; अ    ेन – being no object of perception; च – and; आ नः
– of the Self; िव ेपएका  दय – with mind freed from distractions and
rendered single pointed; एवम् – thus; एव – indeed; अहम् – I; आ  थतः –
abide in myself
2. Having no satisfaction (attachment) in sound and the other sense
objects and the Self being no object of perception, I have my mind
freed from distractions and rendered single pointed. Thus do I,
therefore, abide in myself.
Explaining the stages by which Janaka walked into the palace of
Truth in himself, he confesses here that at this stage he has felt a
growing dissatisfaction with ‘sound and so on’ – meaning in the
study of the scriptures and discussions, in reflection, in japa and so
on and, therefore, he dropped them. Again, he found that even
contemplation is meaningless, because meditation is a process
whereby the mind is trying to visualise, think and experience the Self
which is invisible, unthinkable. Therefore, he has left even all
conscious attempts at contemplation and meditation. Honest to
himself, the disciple declares to his Teacher, ‘Thus do I, therefore,
abide in myself’.
समा ासािदिवि  ौ   वहारः  समाधये।
एवं  िवलो   िनयममेवमेवाहमा  थतः॥३॥
samādhyās-ādi-vikṣiptau vyavahāraḥ samādhaye,
evaṁ vilokya niyamam-evam-evāham-āsthitaḥ. (3)
समअ ासआिदिवि  ौ – in the distractions caused by our
superimpositions and so on;  वहारः – activity; समाधये – for samādhi;
एवम् – thus; िवलो  – seeing; िनयमम् – rule; एवम् – thus; एव – indeed;
अहम् – I; आ  थतः – abide in myself
3. An effort has to be made for samādhi (for concentration) only
when there is distraction of the mind due to one's own
superimpositions. Seeing this to be the rule, thus do I, therefore,
abide in myself.
The efforts at concentration (samādhi) are only for those who have
their minds distracted by their own illusory superimpositions. The
body, the mind, the ego and their objects are all illusory projections
made by the mind and thereafter the mind gets fascinated by them
and, so it is not available for the steady contemplation upon the Self.
When this law is clearly understood by me, Janaka confesses: ‘I
realised that the practice of meditation is only for those who are in
‘ignorance’ suffering from the aftermath of their spiritual ‘ignorance’.
Therefore, I left meditation and thus do I, therefore, abide in myself.’
When all superimpositions (adhyāsa) are left, the seeker realises the
Self and the Self-realised, who is awakened to the plane of infinite
Consciousness, can no longer meditate because he has no
equipment to meditate with, nor any more need for it.
 े ो े ि े  ि ो
हेयोपादेयिवरहादेवं  हष िवषादयोः।
अभावाद   हे      ेवमेवाहमा  थतः॥४॥
heyopādeya-virahād-evaṁ harṣa-viṣādayoḥ,
abhāvād-adya he brahmannevam-evāham-āsthitaḥ. (4)
हेयोपादेयिवरहात् – in the absence of both the rejectable and the
acceptable; एवम् – as well as; हष िवषादयोः – of joy and sorrow; अभावात्
– because of absence; अ  – today; हे – O;   न् – Brahman; एवम् –
thus; एव – indeed; अहम् – I; आ  थतः – abide in myself
4. Finding nothing as acceptable and nothing as rejectable and
having neither joy nor sorrow, ‘O Brahman!’ thus do I, therefore, now
abide in myself.
Addressing his Teacher as, ‘O Brahman!’ and, thereby eloquently
expressing his gratitude to his Teacher, who is, to the disciple, as
great as the Self Supreme, the royal saint continues to explain how
he scrambled to the next stage of the higher meditation.
To a seeker, good is acceptable and evil is rejectable; and the
good and the evil are the judgements of the intellect. Having risen
above the intellect, the yogī reaches a state wherein there is nothing
for him to accept or to reject. He comes to dwell in the Self which
illumines both the concepts of the good and the bad that rise as
thoughts at the intellectual level. Having pursued the good, as its
reward, we experience our life's joys and as a reward of evil we have
life's sorrows. Joys and sorrows are emotions at the mental level.
When the meditator rises above the mind and intellect, he
transcends both the joys and sorrows of the mind and the good and
the bad concepts of the intellect. ‘O Brahman! thus do I, now abide in
myself as pure infinite Consciousness Divine.’
 ि ी  
आ माना मं   ानं  िच  ीकृ तवज नम्।
िवक ं  मम  वी  ैतैरेवमेवाहमा  थतः॥५॥
āśramānāśramaṁ dhyānaṁ citta-svīkṛta-varjanam,
vikalpaṁ mama vīkṣyaitairevam-evāham-āsthitaḥ. (5)
आ मअना मम् – a particular stage of life or no stage of life;  ानम् –
meditation; िच  ीकृ तवज नम् – control of mental functions; िवक म् –
distraction; मम – my; वी   – seeing; एतैः  – by these; एवम् – thus; एव –
indeed; अहम् – I; आ  थतः – abide in myself
5. A particular stage of life, or negation of it, meditation, control of
mental functions (mind) recognising these as cause of distractions in
me, thus do I, indeed, abide in myself.
‘A particular stage of life’ here refers to the traditional divisions of the
Hindu life into four stages. These four stages in life have each its
own distinct duties and disciplines.2 Each stage in life has its
encumbrances of duties and anxieties, which are to Janaka
distractions in his abiding experience of the infinite Self. These
various stages have a meaning only with reference to the individual's
spiritual ‘ignorance’ and his consequent identification with his body
and the world around.
Similarly, ‘meditation’ to a Man of Perfection, whose mind is at
rest, is a wasteful exertion. How can he control his mind from
wandering into sense objects, when from his vision there is nothing
but the Self everywhere. Thus, from his eminence in meditation, he
finds all these as distractions and, therefore, he drops them all. And
Janaka says, ‘Thus, do I, indeed, abide in myself.’
The state Janaka indicates now is beyond all the four stages in
life called in Hindu textbooks as the āśramas. This trans āśrama
state is called as ‘ativarṇāśrami’ or the state of the avadhūta. One
who is in this state of super āśrama has been defined in our śāstras
very precisely as follows, ‘He who has come to realise that he is the
‘witness entirely separate from the body and the sense organs, the
supreme Self, blissful and self-effulgent, he becomes, beyond all
castes and creeds living the super state (ativarṇāśrami).’3
कमा नु ानम ाना थैवोपरम था।
बुद्  ा  स िगदं  त मेवमेवाहमा  थतः॥६॥
karmānuṣṭhānam-ajñānādyathaivoparamas-tathā,
buddhvā samyag-idaṁ tattvam-evam-evāham-āsthitaḥ. (6)
कम अनु ानम् – undertaking of actions; अ ानात् – from ignorance; यथा –
as; उपरमः – cessation; तथा  एव – even as; बुद्  ा  – knowing; स क्  –
fully; इदम् – this; त म् – truth; एवम् – thus; एव – indeed; अहम् – I;
आ  थतः – abide in myself
6. Abstention from action is as much the outcome of ignorance as
the undertaking of action. Knowing this truth fully well, thus do I,
indeed, abide in myself.
What is to be done and what is not to be done are both judgements
of the intellect and intellect itself has manifested from the spiritual
ignorance. As long as the individualised ego is asserting arrogantly,
in order to tame and quieten it, selfless dedicated actions are
prescribed and certain activities which express shamelessly the
lower nature of the ego are forbidden, for those who are walking the
spiritual path. But these rules of do’s and don'ts are made for the
ignorant ego – ‘the Self-forgetful-self’.
So long as one is ill, one should strictly follow the medicines
prescribed and obey the dietetic regulation laid down by his doctor.
But when the illness has left and full health has come back, the
individual pursues his normal habits of healthy living. Similarly, the
disciplines of life, laid down by the kindly Masters, are all meant
essentially for the rediscovery of mental equipoise in the agitated
bosom of the one who is groping in the darkness of ‘ignorance’.
‘Knowing this truth fully well’, says Janaka, in his new found
wisdom, ‘thus do I, indeed, abide in myself’.
अिच ं  िच मानोऽिप  िच ा प ं  भज सौ।
  ा  त ावनं  त ादेवमेवाहमा  थतः॥७॥
acintyaṁ cintyamāno'pi cintārūpaṁ bhajatyasau,
tyaktvā tadbhāvanaṁ tasmād-evam-evāham-āsthitaḥ. (7)
अिच म् – the unthinkable; िच मानः – thinking; अिप – even;
िच ा पम् – a form of thought; भजित – resorts to; असौ – one;   ा  –
giving up; तत् – that; भावनम् – thought; त ात् – so; एवम् – thus; एव –
indeed; अहम् – I; आ  थतः – abide in myself
7. Thinking on the unthinkable One, one resorts only to a form of
(one's own) thought. Therefore, giving up that thought, thus do I,
indeed, abide in myself.
The infinite Self, is the very ‘light’ of Consciousness that illumines all
our thoughts and without which our intellect becomes an inert
equipment of matter. Naturally, the intellect cannot by its activities
comprehend the Self, the very essence behind it. The light in the
bulb of a torch can never illumine the battery behind it! No telescope
can achieve seeing, even dimly, the viewer behind its eyepiece!
Therefore, the Self and its light of Consciousness that enlivens our
life in our bosom is declared by the great ṛṣis as unthinkable.4
To reflect and contemplate upon this Self, which is unthinkable, is
itself again a play of our thoughts. In the early stages of sādhanā this
method is extremely valid, as all other restlessness of the intellect
gets quietened by the thought of the unthinkable! But to one who has
already exploded into the higher plane of Consciousness and who is
living vividly the experience of the infinite Self, for him to sit in
meditation, to contemplate upon the unthinkable is to come out of
the thoughtless state into the restlessness of thought! ‘Therefore’,
says Janaka, ‘giving up that thought, do I, indeed abide in myself’.
एवमेव  कृ तं  येन  स  कृ ताथ   भवेदसौ।
एवमेव   भावो  यः  स  कृ ताथ   भवेदसौ॥८॥
evam-eva kṛtaṁ yena sa kṛtārtho bhaved-asau,
evam-eva svabhāvo yaḥ sa kṛtārtho bhaved-asau. (8)
एवम् – thus; एव – even; कृ तम् – accomplished; येन – by whom; कृ ताथ ः
– fulfilled; भवेत् – becomes; सः  असौ – he (the man); एव – indeed; एवं
 भावः – by such nature; यः – who; सः  असौ – he; कृ ताथ ः  – fulfils
himself; भवेत् – becomes
8. Blessed is the man who has accomplished this. Blessed is he who
thus fulfils himself by his nature divine.
Almost tapping on his own back, as it were, in the ecstasy of his
‘infinite satisfaction’, Janaka blesses himself through his hallelujah
for the man who has attained Godhood even while living
(Jīvanmukta). Śaṅkara defines Videhamukti and Jīvanmukti as
follows.5
When through sādhanā a seeker comes to a stage when all
sādhanās drop off in his own achieved experience of the infinite Self,
he is a unique individual, who though bodily lives amidst us, has
already become the universal Reality. The experience of the Higher,
in him, is spontaneous, effortless, natural. Nothing more can be said
of him. He is verily a God living amidst us. He alone is the blessed
one! He alone is the blessed one!!
1 karmaiva deho nanu deha eva cittaṁ tadevāhamitīha jīvaḥ,
saḥ jīva-eveśvaracit sa ātmā sarvaḥ śivastvekapadoktametat.
– Yogavāsiṣṭha-3.65.13
2 Student’s life (brahmacarya); householder’s life (gṛhastha); hermit’s life
(vānaprastha); and ascetic’s life (sannyāsa). These are the four stages
(āśramas) in the Hindu way of life prescribed in our scriptures.
3 yaḥ śarīrendriyādibhyo vibhinnaṁ sarvasākṣiṇam,
pāramārthikavijñānaṁ sukhātmānaṁ svaprabham,
paramatattvaṁ vijānāti so ativarṇāśramī bhavet.
4 sūkṣmatvāttadavijñeyam – Bhagavad-gītā-13.15
5 brahmaivāhamasmītyaparokṣa jñānena
nikhilakarmabandha vinirmukto jīvanmuktaḥ.
dehapātānantaraṁ muktiḥ videhamuktiḥ.

Chapter – 13
The Bliss Absolute
Introduction
The concluding verse of the previous section opens a vein of poetry
in Janaka and the Liberated in life, the royal saint expounds, in this
section, the absolute Bliss as the very nature of the supreme Reality.
It was already explained by the king that one who totally gives up
all actions of his body, mind and speech alone can reach to abide in
his own real nature. In the pure infinite Consciousness there is
neither action nor inaction, neither joy nor sorrow, neither good nor
bad. These are all values at the body, mind and intellect levels. The
Consciousness, the Self is the illuminator of all these and, therefore,
is of a different category and order.
These seven pregnant verses have succeeded in giving us an
exhaustive estimate of the rewards lived by one who is liberated in
life, while the Upaniṣads have perceptibly failed to communicate to
the students the magnitude of the bliss and glory experienced by a
‘Jīvanmukta’.
Inner renunciation of all our identifications with the perceptions,
emotions and thoughts at the body, mind and intellect levels is a
much more valid relinquishment than a hasty discarding of one's
earthly possessions. The traditional picture of an ascetic is that he
has only a single loincloth and a begging bowl as his own and lives
under some way-side tree. But even in this condition of voluntary
poverty, attachment to that meagre loin cloth (underwear) and
insignificant coconut shell (kamaṇḍalu) can chain his mind down,
refusing him admission into the Highest. Janaka seems to remember
the stinging words of criticism of his Teacher in the earlier chapter.
Janaka lives in a palace amidst all the apparently worldly luxuries.
What has he renounced? Here is the answer from the royal saint
himself.
From this concept of the state of supreme non-dual Self which
remains the same in all the three periods of time, Immutable and
Eternal springs forth the subtle doctrine of Vedānta that is ‘non-
origination’ (ajāta-vāda). In fact, the fragrance and beauty of this
doctrine, are from the flowers of the Upaniṣads. We must, as
students of the Hindu philosophical thoughts admit that Sage
Aṣṭāvakra was, perhaps, the first to recognise and express this
suggestion given by Upaniṣads roughly into the form of a doctrine of
Vedānta. Later on in Māṇḍūkya Kārikā we find this doctrine elaborate
and expounded into a logical and acceptable philosophical thought.
The state of experience expounded here lies beyond the storms
and agitations of the matter equipments in man, and therefore, this
transcendental state is the state of Bliss, ever undisturbed and
absolute.
जनक  उवाच
अिक नभवं   ा  ं  कौपीन ेऽिप  दुल भम्।
 ागादाने  िवहाया ादहमासे  यथासुखम्॥१॥
janaka uvāca
akiñcanabhavaṁ svāsthyaṁ kaupīnatve'pi durlabham,
tyāgādāne vihāyāsmād-aham-āse yathāsukham. (1)
अिक नभवम्  – born of the Consciousness that nothing else exists;
 ा म ् – tranquillity; कौपीन े – in the state of wearing just a loin
 ि   े
cloth; अिप – even; दुल भम्  – rare;  ागादाने – (ideas of) renunciation
and acceptance; िवहाय – giving up; अ ात्  – therefore; अहम्  – I; आसे
– live; यथासुखम्  – a true happiness
Janaka said:
1. The tranquillity, which is born of the awareness that there is
nothing else but the Self, is rare even for one who wears just a loin
cloth. Therefore, by giving up the ideas of renunciation and
acceptance, I live in true happiness.
We have already mentioned in the introduction to this section that
mere external relinquishment of our possessions is not the true
dispassion that can lead us near to the state of spiritual tranquillity.
Even for one who has thus renounced everything and has only the
barest minimum of his essential requirements of life, such as food ,
clothing and shelter, even to such an individual the experience that
‘there is nothing but the Self (akiñcana–bhavam) and, therefore,
nothing else has ever been born as the universe’ is indeed rare. To
renounce or to accept, there must be the still lingering shades of
one’s individualised ego. Where the ego has completely ended,
there is none in the individual either to accept anything or to
renounce anything and that is the state of supreme Bliss. Therefore
says Janaka, ‘By giving up the ideas of renunciation and
acceptance, I live in true happiness.’
Although in almost all the Upaniṣads there is a different theory of
creation expounded by the different ṛṣis, any deep student of the
Upaniṣads can very easily detect that the ultimate anxiety of the
scriptures is to lead the student to a state, beyond mind and intellect,
to recognise and experience therein the infinitude of the divine
substratum. Viewed from this state of pure Consciousness there is
no illusory world, nor are there the delusions of the body, mind and
intellect. In all Its aloneness the glory of the Self pervades
everywhere, immutable, eternal and tranquil.
Thus from the transcendental viewpoint, gained from the Self,
never was there a universe ever projected! This theory of ‘non-
origination’ (ajāta-vāda) is the doctrine that is inherent in the
Upaniṣads and it is only very subtly suggested therein. Aṣṭāvakra
emphasises it to explain it. Gauḍapāda later on took it up for an
exhaustive treatment and gave a total philosophical exposition of it in
his Kārikā to Māṇḍūkya-upaniṣad (Advaita Prakaraṇa): ‘From which
nothing is, in reality, born; though it appears to have manifested in
endless forms.’1
Again, Gauḍapāda clarifies in his Kārikā and concludes his
chapter on non-dualism (Advaita Prakaraṇa) with the following
unambiguous and eloquent verse: ‘No jīva, the egocentric separative
creature, is ever born. There does not exist any cause which can
produce them as its effect. This is the highest Truth where nothing is
ever born.’2
कु  ािप  खेदः  काय   िज ा  कु  ािप   ख ते।
मनः  कु  ािप  त  ा  पु षाथ     थतः  सुखम्॥२॥
kutrāpi khedaḥ kāyasya jihvā kutrāpi khidyate,
manaḥ kutrāpi tattyaktvā puruṣārthe sthitaḥ sukham. (2)
कु    अिप – somewhere; खेदः  – weariness; काय  – of body; िज ा –
tongue; कु    अिप – somewhere;  ख ते – is fatigued; मनः  – mind; कु  
अिप – somewhere; तत्  – this;   ा  – having renounced; (अहम्  – I);
पु षाथ  – in life’s goal;   थतः  – established (अ   – am); सुखम्  – in true
happiness
2. There is weariness of the body here, fatigue of the tongue there
and distress of the mind elsewhere. Having renounced this in life's
goal, I live in true happiness.
The main three sources of weariness and consequently of
restlessness, have already been enumerated earlier as physical, oral
and mental. Janaka in his wisdom discovers that there is weariness
brought to his life by his body. The sense organs are all channels of
sorrow that pour into our bosom restlessness and agitations. In
Yogavāsiṣṭha we read this idea most poetically put: ‘The deer, black
bee, butterfly, elephant, fish each one of these meets with its death
because of its attachment to one or the other of its sense organs.
The ignorant man is attached to all his five senses, and how can he
ever find happiness in this world.’3
Physical senses alone are not the sole cause for the sorrows
mentioned here, but all physical penance can also bring about
weariness of the body for one who is in the ‘higher state of
meditation’, as Janaka was.
The study of scriptures and repetition of mantras in the pursuit of
japa-yoga can also ‘make the tongue fatigued’. The attempt at
meditation is the cause for the distress of the mind, mentioned here.
Therefore, Janaka renounced all these three in the supreme
experience of the infinite Self – the goal of life – and thereby, ‘I live in
true happiness’, declared the king.
कृ तं  िकमिप  नैव   ािदित  सि    त तः ।
यदा  यत्  कतु मायाित  त ृ  ासे  यथासुखम्॥३॥
kṛtaṁ kimapi naiva syād-iti sañcintya tattvataḥ,
yadā yat kartumāyāti tatkṛtvāse yathā-sukham. (3)
कृ तम्  – done (by the Self); िकम्  अिप – nothing whatever; न – not; एव –
certainly;  ात ्  – is; इित – thus; सि    – understanding fully; त तः  –
in reality; यदा – when; यत्  – what; कतु म्  – to do; आयाित – comes; तत्
कृ  ा  – that doing; आसे – (I) live; यथासुखम् – in true happiness
3. Understanding fully that nothing whatsoever is really done by the
Self, I do whatever presents itself to be done and so, I live in true
happiness.
Actions are the expressions of thoughts and they are the
disturbances in the mind caused by desires which are manifestations
of our vāsanās. Where vāsanās have ended, desires cease.
Naturally, mind becomes calm of thought disturbances and the
egocentric aggressive actions can no longer spring from that
individual. That is the state of pure Consciousness. The Self is
actionless as it is full and all-pervading. In this great understanding,
born out of direct subjective experience, Janaka withdraws from all
his fields of endeavour and extinguishes the ‘I do mentality’
(ahaṅkāra) in him.
However, continues Janaka, whenever he is goaded to act in the
world outside due to the pressure of his prārabdha, he does it
willingly ‘as an agent’ of the Lord, the Self.
With his abdication from the seat of the ego, his entire kingdom of
delusion has rolled away from him and ‘so’, says Janaka, ‘I live in
true happiness’.
कम नै    िनब  भावा  देह थयोिगनः।
संयोगायोगिवरहादहमासे  यथासुखम्॥४॥
karma-naiṣkarmya-nirbandha-bhāvā dehastha-yoginaḥ,
saṁyogāyoga-virahād-aham-āse yathā-sukham. (4)
कम नै    िनब  भावाः  – who insist upon action or inaction; देह थयोिगनः
– the yogīs who are attached to the body; संयोग  अयोग  िवरहात्  –
divorced from association and dissociation; अहम्  – I; आसे – live;
यथासुखम्  – in true happiness
4. The spiritual seekers (yogins), who are attached to the body, insist
upon action or inaction. Divorced from both association and
dissociation, I live in true happiness.
Even among the great Masters there are some who definitely seem
to emphasise a dynamic life of dedicated service to the society.
There are other Masters who address the student pleading for a life
of retirement and utter quietude – inaction at the body, mind and
intellect levels. There is Bhagavad-gītā, which wants us to see
‘action in inaction and inaction in actions’. Each one of these great
advices is addressed to the students at varying levels of their own
body consciousness.
Tāmasika people must undertake vigorous programmes of work,
prompted by extreme selfish motives, in order to generate in them
the dynamism of rajas. The rājasika sādhakas should learn to act
vigorously, in a spirit of selfless dedication, in order to generate the
brilliance of ‘sattva’ in their bosom. Again, the fully developed
sāttvika students, in alert and vigilant moments of ‘actionless action’
must heave themselves to reach the larger awakening into the
higher Consciousness in them.
Janaka at the peak of his Realisation has given up both, his
association with the body and has relinquished all his efforts in
dissociating himself with his body. His ego has ended and he sees
nobody to accept or to reject. Thus, ‘I live in true happiness’,
confesses the royal saint.
अथा नथ   न  मे    थ ा  ग ा  वा  शयनेन  वा।
ित न्  ग न्   पन्  त ादहमासे  यथासुखम्॥५॥
arthānarthau na me sthityā gatyā vā śayanena vā,
tiṣṭhan gacchan svapan tasmād-aham-āse yathā-sukham. (5)
अथा नथ  – good or evil; न – not; मे – my;   थ ा – by staying; ग ा – by
going; वा – or; शयनेन – by sleeping; वा – or; ित न्  – staying; ग न्  –
going;  पन्  – sleeping; त ात्  – so; अहम्  – I; आसे – live; यथासुखम्  –
in true happiness
5. No good or evil can be associated with my staying, going or
sleeping. So whether I stay or go or sleep, I live in true happiness.
No action by itself is either good or bad. The intention behind the
action determines its quality with reference to the doer. To an
egoless one, therefore, actions are motivated neither by good nor
evil. They are spontaneous expressions of the divine will cascading
through such perfect Masters. Sitting or going or sleeping, in short,
under all conditions of stability, movement and rest of the body, such
an egoless Master is ever in perfect attunement with the blissful Self,
and Janaka, the Man of Realisation confesses here, ‘I live in true
happiness’.
 पतो  ना    मे  हािनः  िस  य  वतो  न  वा।
नाशो ासौ  िवहाया ादहमासे  यथासुखम्॥६॥
svapato nāsti me hāniḥ siddhir-yatnavato na vā,
nāśollāsau vihāyāsmād-aham-āse yathā-sukham. (6)
 पतः  – sleeping; न – not; अ   – is; मे – my; हािनः  – loss; िस  ः  –
success; य वतः  – striving; न – not; वा – or; नाशो ासौ – loss or
delight; िवहाय – forgoing; अ ात्  – so; अहम्  – I; आसे – live; यथासुखम्  –
in true happiness
6. I do not lose anything by sleeping, nor gain anything by striving.
So giving up thoughts of loss and delight, I live in true happiness.
Having gained the infinite Bliss, to the Man of Perfection there is
nothing to gain by the diligent and exhausting efforts, nor can
anything be taken away from his inner spiritual sovereignty, if he
rests in total peace, apparently undertaking no activities and so living
a life of ‘sleep’. In his inner state of fullness there is nothing for him
to gain by actions, nor can he lose anything from the treasures of his
inner tranquillity, by not acting. All his anxieties for happiness or his
fears for the losses, have been totally given up along with his sense
of ego and thus, declares Janaka ‘I live in true happiness’.
सुखािद पािनयमं  भावे ालो   भू रशः।
शुभाशुभे  िवहाया ादहमासे  यथासुखम्॥७॥
sukhādi-rūpāniyamaṁ bhāveṣvālokya bhūriśaḥ,
śubhāśubhe vihāyāsmād-aham-āse yathā-sukham. (7)
सुखािद पअिनयमम् – fluctuations of the forms of pleasure and so on;
भावेषु – in different conditions; आलो  – observing; भू रशः  – again and
again; शुभाशुभे – good and evil; िवहाय – renouncing; अ ात्  – so; अहम्
– I; आसे – live; यथासुखम्  – in true happiness
7. Observing again and again, the fluctuations of the forms of
pleasures and so on, in different circumstances, I have renounced
good and evil and I live in true happiness.
An ordinary man is tempted to pursue good and avoid evil, because
he is seeking his future happiness. The man of evil is pursuing
diligently his evil ways of life only because he is convinced that he
thereby can have his immediate happiness. In short, search for
happiness is the spring of all activities, both good and evil.
A little deeper investigation into the happenings around us can
make it vividly clear that the people who pursue the good are seen
as often suffering as the evil minded men enjoy happily in life! So, it
is an observed fact that there are fluctuations of pleasure and pain
depending upon the changes in the external environments and the
available circumstances around the individual. Happiness and
sorrow ultimately depend upon our own mental conditions.
Transcending the mind and, therefore, renouncing both good and
evil, Janaka admits, ‘I live in true happiness’ as the blissful infinite
Self.
1 yathā na jāyate kiñcit jāyamānaṁ samantataḥ. – Māṇḍūkya-upaniṣad-3.2
2 na kaścijjāyate jīvaḥ sambhavo'sya na vidyate,
etattaduttamaṁ satyaṁ yatra kiñcinna jāyate. – Māṇḍūkya-upaniṣad-3.48
3 kuraṅgālipataṅgebhamīnāstvekaikaśo hatāḥ,
sarvaiyuktairanarthaistu vyāptāsyājña kutaḥ sukham. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-5.52.21

Chapter – 14
Tranquillity
Introduction
This section consists of only four verses and can be considered as a
sacred ‘Psalm on Peace’, wherein the infinite peace of the
transcendental state is invoked and glorified. Mind is a thought flow.
In a Liberated in life, there can be no desires, as he is experiencing
in his own Self, the infinite fullness; and since he has no desires he
has no thoughts, naturally, he becomes of an empty mind – Void
mind (śūnya cittaḥ). One whose mind is thus completely dissolved in
the voiceless experience of the Infinite, is asleep to the world of
objects and its enchantments. He is awake only to the spiritual world
of this peaceful Self. Janaka concludes this section by declaring that
such an awakened Man of Wisdom can be fully understood only by
another, who like him, has experienced the same state of pure
Consciousness.
जनक  उवाच
 कृ  ा  शू िच ो  यः   मादा ावभावनः।
िनि तो  बोिधत  इव   ीणसंसरणो  िह  सः॥१॥
janaka uvāca
prakṛtyā śūnyacitto yaḥ pramādād-bhāva-bhāvanaḥ,
nidrito bodhita iva kṣīṇa-saṁsaraṇo hi saḥ. (1)
 ि
 कृ  ा – by nature, spontaneously; शू िच ः  – empty-minded; यः  –
who;  मादात्  – through inadvertence; भावभावनः  – thinking of objects
by chance; िनि तः  – asleep; बोिधतः – awake; इव – as if;  ीणसंसरणः  –
one whose recollections of worldly life are extinguished; िह – indeed;
सः  – he
Janaka said:
1. He indeed has his recollections of worldly life extinguished who
becomes void minded spontaneously, who thinks of sense objects
only by chance and who is, as it were, awake though physically
asleep.
Language can never express experiences beyond the physical level
and, therefore, wherever mystic sages have tried to communicate
their subtle transcendental spiritual experiences, they have always
stammered through their brimful descriptions. Here is a typical
example wherein Janaka is trying to explain the inner condition and
the outer behaviour of one, whose mind has become still and empty
of all thought movements (śūnya cittaḥ).
The memories of past experiences in the world of objects,
recorded in our personality for future reference, are called vāsanās.
It is these vāsanās that produce fresh impulses of desires which
procreate the mental and the physical disturbances in the individual
ego. The Man of Perfection is one who has gone beyond his
vāsanās and, therefore, he is described here as ‘one who has
extinguished all his worldly memories’. This state of vāsanālessness
is a state of utter mental stillness in supreme meditation, and this
state of total mental poise is gained by a Man of Realisation
spontaneously, without any conscious effort (prakṛtyā).
Even though he is constantly in the vivid experience of the infinite
Reality, as long as his physical body exists, forced by its prārabdha,
he will be involuntarily forced into some fields of sense objects. He
goes through the world of happenings as though one who is asleep
to the enjoyments of the world around him. He is aware and
supremely awake only to the state of God-consciousness.
This is not a mental state that has been reached through pills or
drugs, nor is it achieved through effort and yoga. One who is
established in his spiritual Awareness, to him this is a spontaneous
vision, constant and effortless. He only becomes casually conscious
of the world of plurality – a beautiful disturbance, dim and distant, on
the horizon of his infinite Bliss!
   धनािन     िम ािण     मे  िवषयद वः।
   शा ं     च  िव ानं  यदा  मे  गिलता    ृहा॥२॥
kva dhanāni kva mitrāṇi kva me viṣaya-dasyavaḥ,
kva śāstraṁ kva ca vijñānaṁ yadā me galitā spṛhā. (2)
  – where; धनािन – riches;   – where; िम ािण  – friends;   – where;
मे – my; िवषयद वः  – thieves in the form of sense objects;   –
where; शा म् – scriptures;   – where; चः – and; िव ानम् –
knowledge; यदा – when; मे – my; गिलता – has melted;   ृहा – desires
2. When once the desires have melted away, where are my riches,
where are my friends, where are the thieves in the form of sense
objects, nay, where are the scriptures and knowledge itself?
Riches (dhanāni), friends (mitrāṇi), scriptures (śāstram), knowledge
(vijñānam) are all of great value for one's security, comfort and
satisfaction while living as an ego amidst the sense objects. As an
ego, when we are living in the world, no doubt, sense objects with
their powerful enchantments can steal into our bosom and plunder
away our peace and tranquillity, our discrimination and
understanding, even our education and culture. True, very very true.
But, when desires have melted away, to one who has thus come to
experience the infinite blissful Self, of what value are these external
scaffoldings – riches, friends, scriptures or knowledge – which hold
together for us our illusory world of pleasure and pains?
To one who has realised the Self, of what value are the scriptures
– of what use is knowledge, spiritual as well as secular? This same
idea is much more poetically put in the Bhagavad-gītā: ‘To the
Brāhmaṇa, who has known the Self, all the Vedas are of so much
use as is a reservoir of water in a place where there is flood
everywhere.’1
िव ाते  साि पु षे  परमा िन  चे रे।
नैरा े  ब मो े  च  न  िच ा  मु य े  मम॥३॥
vijñāte sākṣi-puruṣe paramātmani ceśvare,
nairāśye bandha-mokṣe ca na cintā muktaye mama. (3)
िव ाते – having realised; साि पु षे – Self who is the ‘witness’;
परमा िन – the supreme Self; च – and; ई रे– Lord; नैरा े –
desirelessness; ब मो े – in bondage and Liberation; च – and; न –
not; िच ा – anxiety; मु य े – for emancipation; मम – my
3. As I have realised the supreme Self who is the ‘witness’ and the
Lord, the Puruṣa and have become indifferent both to bondage and
Liberation, I (now) feel no anxiety for my emancipation.
In this four versed chant upon the sense of infinite tranquillity (śānti
catuṣṭaya), Janaka is trying to communicate to us why this spiritual
state is so peaceful and how this state of tranquillity is never
disturbed by the usual storms from the worlds of the body, mind and
intellect.
The supreme Self, the pure Consciousness, is ever illumining as
a ‘witness’ of all that is happening within and without (sākṣi-puruṣa).
It is the one enlivening presence which orders, governs, regulates all
activities of the whole universe and as such is the Lord of the
universe (Īśvara). On rediscovering that this is the seeker's own
divine nature, he becomes indifferent to both bondage and
Liberation. Liberation is only for one who is in bondage. To the
liberated, there can be neither the sorrows of bondage nor the bliss
of Liberation.
Being already emancipated from the sorrowful world, constituted
by his own passions of the body, emotions of the mind and agitations
of the intellect, the Man of Realisation cannot have even the anxiety
for ‘Liberation’.
This state of infinite peace can never be comprehended by us, as
the instruments of comprehension that we have at this moment are
incapable of conceiving dimensions of the Infinite. By a teaspoon
can we ever empty an entire ocean? Can limited mind comprehend
the unthinkable Self and Its peace infinite?
अ िव क शू    बिहः     चा रणः।
 ा   ेव  दशा ा ा ा शा  एव  जानते॥४॥
antar-vikalpa-śūnyasya bahiḥ svacchanda-cāriṇaḥ,
bhrāntasyeva daśāstāstās-tādṛśā eva jānate. (4)
अ ः  – within; िवक शू    – devoid of thoughts; बिहः  – outside;
   चा रणः – one who roams about at his own pleasure;  ा    इव
– like a deluded one; दशाः  – conditions; ताः  ताः  – such and such;
ता शा – those like him; एव – surely; जानते – know
4. The different conditions of a wise man, who, devoid of any
thoughts within, outwardly roams about at his own pleasure like a
deluded man, can only be understood by those like him.
The Man of Perfection established in the higher planes of
Consciousness, has transcended his mind and, therefore, his mind is
silent and void of all thoughts (śūnya cittaḥ). Naturally, he is free of
all hesitations, doubts, uncertainties and confusions. He lives,
thereafter, the spontaneous Life Divine. In him there is no ego sense
at all. No social or political or religious laws are applicable to him. He
lives careless of the consequences. He wants nothing, needs
nothing. He has no demands, no desires. He is full in himself. He
has become the native of the divine fields of Consciousness; He is
only a temporary sojourner amidst us! Thus lived all Men of Wisdom
as guiding light for their generations, but at the same time,
apparently a threatening danger to the existing social rules, political
systems, religious traditions!! Always a law unto themselves.
How can such a man be judged except by men of equal vision
and, therefore, of equal evolution? It is not in every Man of
Realisation that we find a definite clue to their inward illumination in
their outward behaviour.
Such a Man of Realisation is extolled in Yogavāsiṣṭha: ‘One who
has unveiled the Truth in himself, sits ever contented in enjoying the
nectar of his own infinite peace, his mind and intellect completely at
rest, with no inner thought disturbances revelling in his own real
nature.’2
1 yāvānartha udapāne sarvataḥ samplutodake,
tāvānsarveṣu vedeṣu brāhmaṇasya vijānataḥ. – Bhagavad-gītā-2.46
2 saṁśāntāntaḥkaraṇo galitavikalpaḥ svarūpasāramayaḥ,
paramaśamāmṛtatṛptastiṣṭhati vidvānnirāvaraṇaḥ. – Yogavāsiṣṭha

Chapter – 15
Brahman – The Absolute Reality
Introduction
This is perhaps one of the most pregnant and significant sections in
the entire Aṣṭāvakra-gītā. The one ultimate Reality, the Self, is
declared here in unequivocal words: ‘The one Self in all existence
and all existence in the one Self’. The supreme Wisdom, God,
indicated in the scriptures by the term ‘That’ has no birth, no action,
no ego. Such a concept of the Absolute implicitly implies in Itself the
doctrine of non-origination (ajātavāda). All that falls under the cause-
effect system of the mind is nothing but the Self misapprehended as
the illusory world of names and forms.
Aṣṭāvakra lovingly insists, ‘Have faith, my son, have faith
(śradhasva-śradhasva) in this grand majestic Truth.’ The Self is not
only pure Consciousness, which expresses uniformly in all other
planes of Consciousness, but is also something worshipful,
supremely to be revered as God, Bhagavān.
In this chapter thus, the nature of Brahman is brought out for a
direct and immediate apprehension of all the seekers. Aṣṭāvakra
here talks directly from his own mystic experiences. Even in the rich
treasure houses of the Indian mystic literature, we may not find a
parallel textbook that can be compared favourably with the sure
depth of vision and clarity of expression of this Gītā. It is at once
profound and practical. It is profound in its powers of suggestiveness
which can take a meditative mind to the very peaks. It is practical
inasmuch as in other textbooks we do not find such subtle
instructions to help those who are groping along the summits of the
higher meditation.
अ ाव   उवाच
यथातथोपदेशेन  कृ ताथ ः  स बु  मान्।
आजीवमिप  िज ासुः  पर    िवमु ित॥१॥
aṣṭāvakra uvāca
yathā-tathopadeśena kṛtārthaḥ sattva-buddhimān,
ājīvam-api jijñāsuḥ parastatra vimuhyati. (1)
यथा  तथा – in whatever manner, casually; उपदेशेन – by instruction;
कृ ताथ ः  – gains his end; स   बु  मान्  – a person of pure Intelligence;
आजीवम्  – throughout his life; अिप – even; एव – indeed; िज ासुः  –
desirous to know; परः  – the other; त  – there; िवमु ित – is confused
Aṣṭāvakra said:
1. A person of pure Intelligence realises the Self even by instruction
casually imparted. A man of impure intellect is confused in trying to
realise the Self, even after enquiring throughout his life.
The textbook remaining the same and even when the same Teacher
is explaining and expounding the Truth of Vedānta, we find that
different students are benefitted by the same instructions to different
degrees! The text-books of Upaniṣad explain these phenomena and
attribute the success or failure of the student to the student's own
preparedness or unpreparedness in themselves to receive the great
Knowledge Divine.
A mind rich in ‘sattva’ is calm and serene and is most receptive to
the spiritual ideas discussed in the Upaniṣads. But when the mind is
disturbed by agitations (rajas) or when the intellect is clouded by
dullness (tamas), the equipment is not tuned to receive the profound
inner secrets of the scriptural declarations. When a mind is stilled
and well protected from the onslaughts of passions and desires, it is
considered as ‘pure Intelligence’ which alone will have the required
receptivity to apprehend the Truth.
When thus the student is ready to receive the divine message, a
casual instruction from the Teacher is more than sufficient to set the
student on the flight to the state of pure Consciousness.
However, if the student’s inner bosom is not disciplined enough
and his mind and intellect are extremely disturbed by the continuous
waves of passions and desires, such an individual, even after deep
enquiries throughout his life, remains bewildered and confused in
himself without having even a moment’s spiritual experience.
That is the reason why Yogavāsiṣṭha advises all Teachers: ‘In the
beginning examine the student carefully for qualities of self-control
and inner quietude; thereafter, advise him – Thou art the pure
Brahman who is the essence in all this universe’.1
मो ो  िवषयवैर ं  ब ो  वैषियको  रसः।
एतावदेव  िव ानं  यथे िस  तथा  कु  ॥२॥
mokṣo viṣaya-vairasyaṁ bandho vaiṣayiko rasaḥ,
etāvad-eva vijñānaṁ yathecchasi tathā kuru. (2)
मो ः  – Liberation; िवषयवैर म् – distaste for sense objects; ब ः  –
bondage; वैषियकः  – sensual; रसः  – passion; एतावत् – such is; एव –
indeed; िव ानम् – knowledge; यथा – as; इ िस – you wish; तथा – so;
कु   – do
2. Distaste for sense objects is Liberation; passion for sense objects
is bondage. Such indeed is Knowledge. Now you do as you please.
In a very direct and aphoristic style Aṣṭāvakra here defines what
constitutes bondage and what exactly is the nature of Liberation as
far as a seeker is concerned. The arrogant ego, seeking its
satisfaction, hungers for sense gratifications and its entire attention
gets dissipated into the world of sense objects. This is the state of
bondage.
The ego ends as it awakens to the higher experience of the
universal spiritual Essence. In the rising waves of fulfilment, not only
the ego ends, but it has no more any craving for sense gratifications.
This distaste for sense objects is a sign of ‘Liberation’.
Having explained thus, the seer of Vedānta in Aṣṭāvakra gives
the student full freedom to plan his own life and live his days in
complete freedom, as he likes. Those who have yet vāsanās to fulfil,
they must continue living in the sense world for exhausting them.
There is no other way. Those in whom the vigour of vāsanās has
calmed down, in them there is a natural sense of growing distaste
towards sense objects.
Force and compulsion can do nothing in this great path of Self-
rediscovery. It is an evolution and not a revolution. As such, all
Masters, after their advice, leave the student to plan out his life,
according to his own inner impulses. In the concluding verse with
which Kṛṣṇa ends His main discourse in the Bhagavad-gītā we hear
again a similar sentiment expressed by the Lord: ‘Thus has the
wisdom, more secret than all secrets, been declared to you by Me,
having reflected over it fully, you act as you choose.’2
The direction of the mind determines whether the individual is
living in bondage or aspiring for Liberation, say the wise sages :
‘Mind alone is the cause for both bondage and Liberation; sensuous
mind causes bondage, peaceful mind leads one to Liberation.’3
वा   ा महो ोगं  जनं  मूकजडालसम्।
करोित  त बोधोऽयमत  ो  बुभु ुिभः॥३॥
vāgmi-prājña-mahodyogaṁ janaṁ mūka-jaḍālasam,
karoti tattva-bodho'yam-atastyakto bubhukṣubhiḥ. (3)
वा     ा   महा  उ ोगम् – eloquent, wise and active; जनम् – man; मूक
जड  अलसम् – mute, inert and passive; करोित – makes; त   बोध –
knowledge of the Truth; अयम् – this; अतः – so;   ः – is shunned;
बुभु ुिभः – by those who want to enjoy
3. This knowledge of the Truth makes an eloquent, wise and active
person, mute, inert and passive. Therefore, it is shunned by those
who wish to enjoy (the world).
For the material success in the world of sensuality, as it is available
for us in this competitive world, eloquence, worldly wisdom and
vigorous dynamism are unavoidable. The meditative man, who
withdraws from the world of ‘ignorance’ seeking to experience and
live the joys of the Self would naturally become unfit for worldly
success, during his sādhanā period, because a seeker becomes
‘mute, inert and passive’.
These words should not give us the misconception that
spirituality is an undynamic way of living. Buddha under the tree will
be criticised by the men of the world as a useless, idler, a liability to
the community and unfit to live a social life. Only on becoming fully
enlightened, Bhagavān Buddha moved out from under the tree, to
serve the world and came to earn the eternal gratitude of mankind as
a prince of compassion. The profit motivated, impatient man of the
world would naturally consider the spiritual path as too passive and
inert for his taste. They, with abhorrence, would reject the path of
retirement and steady contemplation, because they want to enjoy the
world of sense objects and thus exhaust their vāsanās.
The explanation in this verse justifies what Aṣṭāvakra has said to
his disciple in the previous verse: ‘Now do as you please’.
 े ो े े ो ो  
न   ं  देहो  न  ते  देहो  भो ा  कता   न  वा  भवान्।
िच ूपोऽिस  सदा  सा ी  िनरपे ः  सुखं  चर॥४॥
na tvaṁ deho na te deho bhoktā kartā na vā bhavān,
cidrūpo'si sadā sākṣī nirapekṣaḥ sukhaṁ cara. (4)
न – not;  म् – you; देहः  – body; न – not; ते – your; देहः  – body; भो ा –
enjoyer; कता  – doer; न – not; वा – or; भवान्  – you; िच ूपः  –
Consciousness itself; अिस – are; सदा – ever; सा ी – witness; िनरपे ः  –
indifferent; सुखम्  – happy; चर – go about
4. You are not the body, nor is the body yours. You are neither the
‘doer’ nor the ‘enjoyer’. You are Consciousness itself, the eternal,
indifferent witness. You go about happily.
To those of his students who have the taste to walk the spiritual path,
Aṣṭāvakra continues. In the false understanding that we are body, we
run after the sense objects for our satisfaction and happiness. Here
the Teacher advises us that neither are we the bodies, nor are the
bodies ours. We must avoid both our sense of ‘I-ness’ and ‘mine-
ness’ with the body. One is not the ‘doer’ who does his activities
through the body; nor is one the ‘enjoyer’ who enjoys the outer
world, again through the body. The ‘doership’ and the ‘enjoyership’
together constitute the ego sense in us; this is to be completely
negated.
After thus negating the gross and the subtle bodies, the sage
directly points out what the true spiritual nature of man is, ‘You are
pure Consciousness’. And as the light of Intelligence in the
individual, you are a witness of all the experiences of the body, mind
and intellect and you are ever indifferent to both the joys and
sorrows of the equipments. Understanding this, may ‘you go about
happily’ thus blesses sage Aṣṭāvakra.
 े ौ ो   े
राग ेषौ  मनोधम   न  मन े  कदाचन।
िनिव क ोऽिस  बोधा ा  िनिव कारः  सुखं  चर॥५॥
rāga-dveṣau mano-dharmau na manaste kadācana,
nirvikalpo'si bodhātmā nirvikāraḥ sukhaṁ cara. (5)
राग ेषौ – passions and aversions; मनोधम   – qualities of mind; न – not;
मनः  – mind; ते  – your; कदाचन – ever; िनिव क ः  – free from
fluctuations; अिस – are; बोधा ा – Intelligence itself; िनिव कारः  –
changeless; सुखम्  – happily; चर – go about
5. Passions and aversions are the qualities of the mind. The mind is
never yours. You are Intelligence itself free from all fluctuations and
changeless. You go about happily.
The passions and lusts, likes and dislikes, joys and sorrows – these
are all fluctuations in the mental stuff and they all belong to the mind.
As the pure infinite Consciousness you are the Illuminator of them
all; you are not the mind. Consciousness alone illumines the
oscillations of the mind and its inner conflicts. As the Illuminator, you
are beyond all restlessness of the mind, ever the same blissful Self.
Having realised thus, Aṣṭāvakra says, ‘You go about happily’.
सव भूतेषु  चा ानं  सव भूतािन  चा िन।
िव ाय  िनरहंकारो  िनम म ं  सुखी  भव॥६॥
sarva-bhūteṣu cātmānaṁ sarva-bhūtāni cātmani,
vijñāya nirahaṅkāro nirmamas-tvaṁ sukhī bhava. (6)
सव भूतेषु – in all beings; च – also; आ ानम्  – Self; सव भूतािन – all
beings; च – also; आ िन – in the Self; िव ाय – knowing (realising);
िनरहंकारः  – free from I-ness; िनम मः  – free from mine-ness;  म्  – you;
सुखी – happy; भव – be
6. Realising the Self in all beings and all beings in the Self, free from
'I-ness' and free from ‘mine-ness’, May you be happy.
The twin expressions of the ego are the ‘I-ness’ and the ‘my-ness’.
The arrogance of individuality in our bosom expressing as ‘I-ness’
creates the delusory idea of possession towards some of the objects
outside expressed as ‘my-ness’. To transcend the ego is to end all
the sorrow created by these two illusory concepts of ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-
ness’. To experience that the Consciousness in each one is the
Consciousness everywhere present, is to understand infinite
Consciousness; and this is the highest state of Realisation where the
sense of ego has totally ended.
Aṣṭāvakra accepts Gītā’s concept that the Supreme is at once
transcendental and immanent. The first line of this verse is bodily
lifted from Gītā verse, wherein Bhagavān says: ‘With the mind
harmonised by Yoga he sees the Self, abiding in all beings and all
beings in the Self; he sees the same everywhere.’4
Thus recognising your oneness with the whole cosmos, released
from all tensions and conflicts, advises the sage, ‘May you be
happy’.
िव ं   ु रित  य ेदं  तर ा  इव  सागरे।
त मेव  न  स ेहि  ूत   िव रो  भव॥७॥
viśvaṁ sphurati yatredaṁ taraṅgā iva sāgare,
tat-tvam-eva na sandehaścinmūrte vijvaro bhava. (7)
िव म् – universe;  ु रित – is manifested; य  – in which; इदम् – this;
तर ाः  – waves; इव – like; सागरे – in the ocean; तत्  – that;  म्  – you;
एव – indeed; न – not; स ेहः  – doubt; िच ूत  – O! you pure
Intelligence; िव रः  – free from fever; भव – be
7. O you, pure Intelligence! In you the universe manifests itself like
waves in the ocean. Be you free from the fever of the mind.
One of the four mighty spiritual commandments in the Hindu Vedas
is the declaration: tat tvam asi – ‘That thou art’. This statement is
resoundingly echoed in this verse of Aṣṭāvakra. The sage instructs
the student, ‘You are That from which the apparent illusions of the
world rise up, play for a while and disappear, as the waves from the
ocean. You are that pure Intelligence (cin-mūrti).’
To realise our real nature to be the pure light of Consciousness is
to disassociate ourselves from our identifications with our mind and,
therefore, from all desires. The outer worldly objects, by themselves,
cannot bring any agitation and fever to the mind. It is our desire to
possess and enjoy the sense objects that lends to the objects the
power and the strength to tyrannise us. When the desires have
ended, the mind suffers no more any feverish excitements, and can
have none of its terrifying deliriums. The mind becomes calm and
serenely happy.
     तात       ना   मोहं  कु     भोः।
 ान  पो  भगवाना ा   ं   कृ ते  परः॥८॥
śraddhasva tāta śraddhasva nātra mohaṁ kuruṣva bhoḥ,
jñāna-svarūpo bhagavān-ātmā tvaṁ prakṛte paraḥ. (8)
    – have faith; भोः  तात – O! son;  द् घ  – have faith; न – not; अ 
– in this; मोहम्  – delusion; कु    – make;  ान  पः – Knowledge
itself; भगवान् – Lord; आ ा – Self;  म् – you;  कृ तेः  परः – beyond
nature
8. Have faith, my son, have faith! Have no delusion about this! You
are Knowledge itself. You are the Lord. You are the Self. You are
beyond nature.
It has been emphasised in the Bhagavad-gītā also that a man of faith
alone can gain the spiritual wisdom: ‘The man who is full of faith,
who is devoted to it, and who has subdued the senses, obtains (this)
Knowledge and having obtained Knowledge he goes ere long to the
supreme peace.’5
Here we must stop for a moment and understand the exact
import of this term faith (śraddhā). No other word in the spiritual
diction has been, perhaps, so much abused by the organised
religions of the world. Faith, as generally understood, is a ‘blind
belief’, an empty concurrence with all half-truths! In effect ‘faith’ has
come to clamp on an unhealthy control over the intellect to question
and to investigate; to argue and to understand. This is not the sense
in which the term ‘śraddhā’ is employed in literature of Vedānta.
Śaṅkara is forced to define in the Vivekacūḍāmaṇi indicating that the
term ‘śraddhā’ only implies the ability of the human intellect in
educating itself through study and direct diligent enquiry, in the
following words: ‘That is called the spirit of faith (śraddhā) by which
an individual understands readily the exact import of the scriptural
texts, as well as the pregnant words of advice given by the
preceptor, by which alone the reality of things becomes manifestly
clear.’6
In short, faith is a belief in what I don't know at this moment, so
that I may come to know what I merely believe in today. Aṣṭāvakra
emphasises the utter need for maintaining brilliant enquiry, to have
an alert intellect and mind and to believe in one's own intellectual
and spiritual convictions. Without faith in oneself and in one's own
goal, self unfoldment is impossible.
In this connection, we are reminded of Yogavāsiṣṭha's declaration
and the advice: ‘You deserve to accept with an ‘Om’ all that what we
are now telling you. We have for long enquired and searched for this
Truth, and you need not enquire or discuss.’7 Have faith and accept
the authority of the mystic statements.
If this kind of enlightened attitude of faith is not constantly
maintained in our bosom, the mind will not be quiet and serene and,
therefore, the student’s meditation would naturally become
ineffectual. Mind at rest alone is the ‘peep-hole’ through which the
seeker rediscovers his real nature. Declares Mahopaniṣad: ‘That
mind which is agitationless, that is Immortality, that alone is tapas. In
the texts of Upaniṣads this is what they call as Liberation (mokṣa).’8
गुणैः  संवेि तो  देह    ायाित  याित  च।
आ ा  न  ग ा  नाग ा  िकमेनमनुशोचिस॥९॥
guṇaiḥ saṁveṣṭito dehas-tiṣṭhatyāyāti yāti ca,
ātmā na gantā nāgantā kim-enam-anuśocasi. (9)
गुणैः  – by the constituents of nature; संवेि तः  – enclosed; देहः  – body;
ित ित – stays; आयाित – comes; याित – goes; च – and; आ ा – Self; न –
not; ग ा – goes; न – not; आग ा – comes; िकम्  – why; एनम – it;
अनुशोचिस – lament, mourn
9. The body composed of the constituents of nature, comes, stays
and goes away. The Self neither comes nor goes. Why, then, do you
mourn over it?
The body made of the five great elements must necessarily go back
to the elements. While the body exists, it functions under its
predominant qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas. The body has
manifested in order to supply us with our required experiences of the
outer and inner worlds. The ego possesses the body and through it
the ego enjoys the world. In all these patterns of existence, the Self,
as the pure Consciousness, is the ‘Illuminator’ of them all. The
eternal Self never came, never played, never ended. It was, is and
shall ever be. That supreme Truth is your real nature. Then why
should you mourn over the death of your body? Should the ocean
feel miserable for all the waves that have died?
The tone of expression and the idea expressed both remind us of
the Bhagavad-gītā.9
 े   ै
देह   तु  क ा ं  ग   ैव  वा  पुनः।
   वृ  ः     च  वा  हािन व  िच ा  िपणः॥१०॥
dehas-tiṣṭhatu kalpāntaṁ gacchatvadyaiva vā punaḥ,
kva vṛddhiḥ kva ca vā hānistava cinmātra-rūpiṇaḥ. (10)
देहः  – body; ित तु– let remain; क ा म् – till the end of the cycle;
ग्◌ा तु – let go; अ   – today; एव – itself; वा – or; पुनः  – again;   –
where; वृ  ः  – increase;   – where; च – and; वा – or; हािनः  –
decrease; तव – of you; िच ा  िपणः  – who are pure Intelligence
10. Let the body last to the end of the ‘cycle’ (kalpa) or let it go just
today itself! Where is there any increase or decrease in you, who are
pure Intelligence?
The body exists and plays out in the Self, springing from the illusions
of the observing mind. The existence of the world, or its dissolution
cannot add or take away anything from the Self; just as a post is
unaffected by the appearance of the ghost or its disappearance.
Why then should a sincere seeker ever feel afraid of death? The
body has nothing to do with the Self, which is the true nature of man.
  न महा ोधौ  िव वीिचः   भावतः।
उदेतु  वा मायातु  न  ते  वृ  न   वा   ितः॥११॥
tvayyananta-mahāmbhodhau viśvavīciḥ svabhāvataḥ,
udetu vāstam-āyātu na te vṛddhirna vā kṣatiḥ. (11)
 िय – in you; अन महा ोधौ– in the infinite ocean; िव वीिचः – the
waves of the universe;  भावतः  – spontaneously; उदेतु – let them
rise; वा – or; अ म्  आयातु – let them subside, disappear; न – not; ते –
your; वृ  ः  – gain, increase; न – not; वा – or;  ितः  – loss
11. In you, who are the infinite ocean (of Consciousness), let the
waves of the universe spontaneously rise and disappear. There can
be no gain or loss to you.
That the universe is spontaneously rising and merging into the ‘Self’,
is a repetition of the thought already given out in Janaka's discourse
on ‘The Self Supreme’.10
Creations and dissolutions of the universes are the illusions of
the mind. They are valid only at the plane of the ego; they have no
existence at all in the state of pure Consciousness. Let dreams
come, stay and disappear. How does it add to or take away anything
from the waker?
तात  िच ा  पोऽिस  न  ते  िभ िमदं  जगत्।
अतः  क   कथं  कु    हेयोपादेयक ना॥१२॥
tāta cinmāt-rarūpo'si na te bhinnam-idaṁ jagat,
ataḥ kasya kathaṁ kutra heyopādeya-kalpanā. (12)
तात – son; िच ा  पः  – pure Intelligence itself; अिस – you are; न –
not; ते – from you; िभ म्  – different; इदम् – this; जगत्  – world; अतः  –
therefore; क  – whose; कथम्  – how; कु   – where; हेय - उपादेय  क ना
– the thought of the rejectable and the acceptable
12. O Son! You are pure Intelligence itself. This universe is nothing
different from you. Therefore, how, where and whose can be the
ideas of acceptance and rejection?
How can anyone accept or reject oneself? There is only one infinite
Self everywhere; ‘That Self am I’; then what is there for me to accept
other than myself? How can I reject myself as where is anything
other than myself?
The ideas of accepting something as real and rejecting those that
are unreal, false or delusory, are all functions of the mind. I am the
pure Intelligence; there is no mind in me. Therefore, there is no
meaning in my accepting anything as real or rejecting anything as
unreal. I alone am the Reality. There is nothing beyond me.
In Yogavāsiṣṭha, we read : ‘In the bright hot summer noon just as
we see different colours in the sky, so too, are the infinite powers
divine, in Him who is both existence and non-existence.’11
एक    ये  शा े  िचदाकाशेऽमले   िय।
कु तो  ज   कु तो  कम   कु तोऽहंकार  एव  च॥१३॥
ekasminn-avyaye śānte cidākāśe'male tvayi,
kuto janma kuto karma kuto'haṅkāra eva ca. (13)
एक  न् – in the one; अ ये – undecaying; शा े – serene; िचदाकाशे –
the space which is Consciousness; अमले – pure;  िय – in you; कु तः  –
from where; ज  – birth; कु तः  – from where; कम  – activity; कु तः  – from
where; अहंकार – ego; एव – even; च – and
13. From where will there be birth, activity and even the ego sense,
for you who are the one, immutable, serene, stainless, pure
Consciousness?
The non-dual infinite Reality should be immutable, for change is the
signature of the limited and the many. Since the Consciousnesss is
beyond the realm of the mind, it should be serene as none of the
disturbances of the mind can even reach the realm of the Self. The
light of Consciousness is that which illumines even the vāsanās.
Therefore, in the Self there cannot be vāsanās hence it is indicated
as stainless. ‘Thus the one, immutable, stainless, pure
Consciousness (cidākāśa ) is your real nature,’ is the declaration of
the Sage Aṣṭāvakra.
Naturally, there cannot be, in you, either birth or action or ego –
all these three are expressions of the ‘non-apprehension of Reality’
which is called the spiritual ‘ignorance’.
The term ‘cidākāśa’ is an original phrase used with much
dexterity and daring; and in Yogavāsiṣṭha and other text-books we
find it freely copied and very readily popularised. Space (ākāśa) is
that which gives accommodation to things. In space alone objects
can exist and they can be perceived. The space in which the worldy
objects exist and in which they are perceived is called ‘mahākāśa’.
The space in which thoughts exist and are perceivable is called
‘citta-ākāśa’and the space of intelligence is called ‘cidākāśa’,
wherein the infinitude of the Self is intuitively perceived. In the verse,
the real nature of the student is indicated as this ‘cidākāśa’.
य ं  प िस  त ैक मेव   ितभाससे।
िकं  पृथ ासते   णा त्  कटका दनूपुरम्॥१४॥
yat-tvaṁ paśyasi tatraikas-tvam-eva pratibhāsase,
kiṁ pṛthag-bhāsate svarṇāt kaṭakāṅgada-nūpuram. (14)
यत्  – what;  म्  – you; प िस – see; त  – there; एकः – alone;  म्  –
you; एव – verily;  ितभाससे – manifesting or reflecting; िकम्  – what;
पृथक्  – different; भासते – appears;  णा त्  – from gold; कटक  अ द
नूपुरम्  – bangles, armlets and anklets
14. You alone manifest as whatever you perceive. Do bangles,
armlets and anklets appear different from gold?
The ornaments are different in names and forms, yet they are not
different from gold, the material from which they are made. The
universe of names and forms has sprung from the Consciousness,
which is your true nature. Therefore, can there be anything in the
universe which is not yourself?
The Chāndogya-upaniṣad also declares in one of her most
famous statements: ‘Dear son, by knowing one piece of mud, all
things made of mud are understood, in fact, the mud alone is the
substance, the names and forms are mere words.’12
In short, all effects are nothing but the cause itself in another
form. As such the universe is nothing but the infinite Self
experienced yet in another form.
अयं  सोऽहमयं  नाहं  िवभागिमित  स ज।
सव मा ेित  िनि    िनःसंक ः  सुखी  भव॥१५॥
ayaṁ so'ham-ayaṁ nāhaṁ vibhāgam-iti santyaja,
sarvam-ātmeti niścitya niḥsaṅkalpaḥ sukhī bhava. (15)
अयम्  – this; सः  – He; अहम्  – I; अयम्  – this; न – not; अहम्  – I; िवभागम्  –
distinction; इित – this; स ज – giving up totally; सव म्  – all; आ ा –
Self; इित – this; िनि   – realising; िनःसंक ः  – free from desire; सुखी –
happy; भव – be
15. Totally give up all such distinctions as ‘I am He’ and ‘This I am
not’. Consider all as the Self and be desireless and happy.
According to Aṣṭāvakra, the transcendental Reality and the universe
of names and forms are not distinct and separate factors. The waves
themselves are nothing but the ocean itself, in a state of disturbance.
Consciousness under the stress of desire ‘universes’ into the
multiple names and forms. Whatever their apparent nature be, they
are all nothing but the supreme Self.
When thus one has realised that the objects outside are nothing
other than one's own Self, how can that one ever have any passion
or desire? How can he yearn to possess, to enjoy and thereby seek
his satisfaction in the sense objects? We are fascinated by the
objects only when we consider them as something different from
ourselves.
In the awakened state of spiritual experience, the ṛṣis of the
Upaniṣads declare: ‘These are all nothing but the Self’13. ‘The entire
universe of change is, in essence, nothing but Brahman’14.
Therefore, the idea that ‘The Self in me is He, the supreme
Reality’, is an assertion which expresses the ‘ignorance’ of the Self !
The negations, ‘I am not the body, or the objects outside’ is an empty
childish game, the mad blabberings of the limited, deluded ego!!
‘I am the all – there is nothing besides me. I can neither assert
my nature, nor negate anything in me. I am the one, the all-
pervading’. Having realised this State Supreme, may you remain,
without any mental oscillations of acceptance or rejection of
anything, still, calm, serene in your own Self – be happy!
तवैवा ानतो  िव ं   मेकः  परमाथ तः।
  ोऽ ो  ना    संसारी  नासंसारी  च  क न॥१६॥
tavaivājñānato viśvaṁ tvam-ekaḥ paramārthataḥ,
tvatto'nyo nāsti saṁsārī nāsaṁsārī ca kaścana. (16)
तव – your; एव – alone; अ ानतः  – through ignorance; िव म्  – universe;
 म्  – you; एकः  – One; परमाथत ः  – in reality;   ः – than you; अ ः  –
other; न – not; अ   – is; संसारी – transmigratory ego (jīva); न – not;
असंसारी – non-transmigratory (transcendental Self); च – and; क न –
any
16. It is through your ‘ignorance’ alone that the universe appears to
exist. In reality you are the One. Other than you there is no individual
self (jīva) nor supreme Self (Ᾱtman).
So long as the mind functions, there is the ego, the perceiver, who
perceives the universe. For the universe, there must be a Creator
(God); for the God, there must be a supreme Consciousness
(Brahman); for the individual ego (jīva), there must be the
Consciousness that is the Self (Ᾱtman) behind it. Thus, once we
perceive the world of plurality (jagat), we must recognise the Lord
(Īśvara), the Self (Ᾱtman) and the supreme Reality (Brahman). All
these distinctions are only to help the individual, step by step, stage
by stage, in his unfoldment to realise and awake to the one
Infinitude.
‘In reality you are the One; other than you there is neither an
individual ego (jīva) nor a supreme Self (Ᾱtman).’ Just as on
awakening from a dream there is no more a dreamer, nor a
dreamworld. All have merged to become the waker’s own mind!
The sense of ego and its sorrow (saṁsāra) are all not because of
your equipments, but because of your extrovertedness. Even when
the equipments are there, as in the case of great sages, when you
develop the inward gaze to recognise and experience the presence
of the divine seat of Consciousness in yourself, you are ever in Bliss.
In clear vivid words we read this very idea in the Saṅkṣepa Śārīraka:
‘Because of your extrovertedness if you are not able to recognise
your own Self, then the equipments that constitute your form indeed
becomes a painful calamity. When this veiling of ignorance is
removed, and you realise the Self, this very same form of yours,
made up of your equipments becomes completely satisfactory.’15
 ा  मा िमदं  िव ं  न  िकि िदित  िन यी।
िनवा सनः   ू ित मा ो  न  िकि िदव  शा ित॥१७॥
bhrānti-mātram-idaṁ viśvaṁ na kiñcid-iti niścayī,
nirvāsanaḥ sphūrtimātro na kiñcid-iva śāmyati. (17)
 ा  मा म्  – mere illusion; इदम् – this; िव म्  – universe; न – not;
िकि त्  – anything; इित – this; िन यी – one who understands with
certitude; िनवा सनः  – desireless;  ू ित मा ः  – Intelligence itself; न – not;
िकि त्  – anything; इव – as if; शा ित – finds serenity
17. One who understands with certitude that this universe is but an
illusion and is nothing, becomes desireless and pure Intelligence and
finds serenity, as if nothing exists.
Through one’s own direct experience of the Self, when one
understands with certitude (niścaya) that everything else is delusion
– the Self alone is the Reality – he must thereafter become
completely desireless. How can he desire anything when there is
nothing other than himself ? Spontaneously he must come to
experience a supreme serenity of the mind, ‘as if nothing exists’ to
disturb his mind from the outer world of objects or from the inner
world of passions! A Man of Perfection also lives in this world – the
world familiar to us, the world of enchanting sense objects.
Whenever the wise man looks out into the world, through his
physical and mental equipments, certainly, he too will be recognising
the world of objects and emotions. He recognises them, but they
cannot affect him, as his realisation that nothing else exists but the
Self, is continuous, powerful and constant.
एक  एव  भवा ोधावासीद    भिव ित।
न  ते  ब ोऽ    मो ो  वा  कृ तकृ  ः  सुखं  चर॥१८॥
eka eva bhavāmbhodhāvāsīd-asti bhaviśyati,
na te bandho'sti mokṣo vā kṛtakṛtyaḥ sukhaṁ cara. (18)
एकः  – one; एव – only; भवा ोधौ – in the ocean of the existence; आसीत्
– was; अ   – is; भिव ित – will be; न – not; ते – your; ब ः  – bondage;
अ   – is; मो ः  – Liberation; वा – or; कृ तकृ  ः  – contented, fulfilled;
सुखम्  – happily; चर – roam about
18. In the ocean of existence the one Self only was, is and will be.
There is neither bondage nor Liberation for you. Live fulfilled and
roam about happily.
The names and forms are different to any casual observer; yet, a
little deeper contemplation can explain to us that individually every
object exists – the tree exists, the animal exists, the man exists, I
exist, you exist, he exists. The 'Existence' is apparently a common
factor in you, me and him. Individuals may be different from each
other, the tree is not the animal; the animal is not the human. But the
‘Existence’ in a stone, in a flower, in an animal, in a plant, in the star
and in the sun and moon seems to be one and the same. There is
one Existence (sattā) in which things ‘exist’. This Existence is the
expression of the infinite Reality behind names and forms and
thereafter, It was, is and will be.
This one Self is your real nature. As such there cannot be for you
either bondage or Liberation. You alone are !! What can then bind
you? From what to liberate yourself ? Do you mean to say that you
have bound yourself with yourself, in yourself, by yourself!! Bondage
(bandha) and Liberation (Mokṣa) have both no meaning at all to one
who has realised his oneness with the Self. ‘Life, thus fulfilled’
Aṣṭāvakra recommends, ‘roam about happily’.
मा  स  िवक ा ां  िच ं   ोभय  िच य।
उपशा   सुखं  ित    ा  ान िव हे॥१९॥
mā saṅkalpa-vikalpābhyāṁ cittaṁ kṣobhaya cinmaya,
upaśāmya sukhaṁ tiṣṭha svātmanyānanda-vigrahe. (19)
मा – not; स  िवक ा ाम् – by affirming and negating; िच म् – mind;
 ोभय – disturb; िच य – O! pure Intelligence; उपशा  – silencing;
सुखम् – happily; ित  – abide;  ा िन – in your own Self; आन   िव हे –
in the embodiment of Bliss
19. O pure Intelligence! Do not disturb your mind by affirming and
negating things. Silencing them, abide happily in your own Self,
which is an embodiment of the Bliss Absolute.
You are by nature nothing but the pure infinite Consciousness. There
is nothing for you to affirm nor is there anything for you to negate. In
the Self there are neither the bodies nor the mind nor the intellect.
These belong to the realm of delusion. To the awakened Self, there
is nothing to assert or to negate. Therefore, ‘silencing them’ live
happily in your divine spiritual nature. As the divine Spirit you are a
mass of Bliss. None of the disturbances of the pluralistic world can
rise to shatter the one light of Consciousness.
In Yogavāsiṣṭha, the sage asks : ‘The idea of ‘I am’ takes you to
bondage; the idea ‘I am not’ leads you to Liberation. This is what the
bondage is, which is in your own hands. Why feel incompetent to
reach freedom?’16
It is in your own free will to liberate. Yogavāsiṣṭha adds: ‘The idea
of ‘this is mine’ takes you to bondage; the idea ‘I am not’ leads you to
Liberation. This is what bondage is, which is in your own hands. Why
feel you are in ‘ignorance’?17 There is nothing for you to affirm or
negate. Therefore end this agitation. You are the Self!
 जैव   ानं  सव    मा  िकि द्  िद  धारय।
आ ा   ंमु   एवािस  िकं  िवमृ   क र िस॥२०॥
tyajaiva dhyānaṁ sarvatra mā kiñcid-hṛdi dhāraya,
ātmā tvaṁ-mukta evāsi kiṁ vimṛśya kariṣyasi. (20)
 ज – give up; एव – even;  ानम् – contemplation; सव   – everywhere;
मा – not; िकि त्  – anything;  िद – in the mind; धारय – hold; आ ा –
Self;  म् – you; मु ः  – free; एव – indeed; अिस – are; िकम् – what;
िवमृ  – thinking; क र िस – will do
20. Completely give up even contemplation and hold nothing in your
mind. You are indeed the Self, ever free. What will you do by
meditation?
To one who has slept, there can be no more any ‘attempt to sleep’.
To the sleeper there is no more any anxiety to sleep, he is already
asleep. Similarly, once you have realised that ‘You are indeed the
Self, ever free’ thereafter, to think, to contemplate or to meditate
upon the nature of the Self, would be to recrystallise your ego and
disturb your Experience Divine, with the flutterings of your mind.
In short, to give up meditation through meditation is the highest
meditation! There is no greater meditation than the meditationless-
meditation. It is infinite fulfilment. It is the end of the way and the last
leap into the goal. Here yoga ends. The dream of the ego has rolled
away. The Self, as the Self, revels in the Self. The meditator has
become the meditated. Man has stepped onto the throne of God!
This is no poetic exaggeration of Aṣṭāvakra. Yogavāsiṣṭha also
roars the same naked truth: ‘Self being infinite, delusion in It is
impossible; sādhanā to realise the changeless mass of
Consciousness is indeed a delusion only.’18
1 ādau śamadamaprāyairguṇairśiṣyaṁ viśodhayet,
paścātsarvamidaṁ brahma śuddhastvamiti bodhayet. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-4.39.23
2 iti te jñānamākhyātaṁ guhyādguhyataraṁ mayā,
vimṛśyaitadaśeṣeṇa yathecchasi tathā kuru. – Bhagavad-gītā-18.63
3mana eva manuṣyāṇāṁ kāraṇaṁ bandhamokṣayoḥ,
bandhāya viṣayāsaktaṁ muktyai nirviṣayaṁ smṛtam. – Amṛtbindu Upaniṣad-2
4 sarvabhūtasthamātmānaṁ sarvabhūtāni cātmani,
īkṣate yogayuktātmā sarvatra samadarśanaḥ. – Bhagavad-gītā-6.29
5 śraddhāvāṁllabhate jñānaṁ tatparaḥ saṁyatendriyaḥ,
jñānaṁ labdhvā parāṁ śāntimacireṇādhigacchati. – Bhagavad-gītā-4.39
6 śāstrasya guruvākyasya satyabuddhyavadhāraṇā,
sā śraddhā kathitā sadbhiryayā vastūpalabhyate. – Vivekacūḍāmaṇi-25
7 yadidaṁ vacmi tatsarvaṁ omityādātumarhasi,
asmābhiściramanviṣṭaṁ nātra kāryā vicāraṇā. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-7.7.5
8 yattu cañcalatāhīnaṁ tanmano'mṛtamucyate,
tadeva c tapaḥ śāstrasiddhānte mokṣa ucyate. – Mahopaniṣad-4.101
9 Bhagavad-gītā – 2.11 to 13 and 16 to 18
10 Aṣṭāvakra-gītā – 6.2
11 vicitravarṇatā yadvad dṛśyate kaṭhinātape,
vicitraśaktitā tadvad deveśe sadasanmayī. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-4.11.53
12 yathā somyaikena mṛtpiṇḍena sarvaṁ mṛṇmayaṁ vijñātam̐
syād vācārambhaṇaṁ vikāro nāmadheyaṁ mṛttiketyeva satyam.
– Chāndogya-upaniṣad-6.1.4
13 ātmaiva idaṁ jagat sarvam.
14 sarvaṁ brahmaiva jagat.
15 tava rūpameva tava duḥkhakaraṁ yadi tanna paśyasi bahirmukhadhīḥ,
tava rūpameva tava tṛptikaraṁ yadi tatprapaśyasi nivartya tamaḥ.
– Saṅkṣepa Śārīraka
16 ahamityeva bandhāy nāhamityeva muktaye,
etāvanmātrake bandhe svāyatte kimaśaktatā. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-7.25.20
17 mamedamiti bandhāya nāhamityeva muktaye,
etāvanmātrake vastunyātmāyatte kimajñatā. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-7.25.22
18 anantatvāt anantasya bhrāntirnāsti ca samprati,
abhyāsa bhrāntirakhilaṁ mahācidghanamakṣatam. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-7.190.37

Chapter – 16
Self-abidance – Instructions
Introduction
If the previous chapter is a very significant lesson for the highest
students in Vedānta, the present chapter is the most profitable one
for the students of a lesser order, who are yet striving to come out of
their delusory misconceptions. Here, in this chapter, we have some
special instructions, reliable tips for the great race. Sage Aṣṭāvakra
suggests some sacred means for Self-abidance.
To end in the knowledge of the Self, all perceptions of the world,
and to destroy all our desires for sense objects, is the unique state of
Liberation. Many fail to get established in this grand state of
Consciousness, though it must be admitted, very many seekers do
get some exotic glimpses of the blissful state. What cheats them of
their Self-abidance? Why this tragedy in the life of some seekers?
Aṣṭāvakra gives us a very satisfactory explanation in this chapter. He
also provides us with some very effective tips to correct our ways, to
avoid the pitfalls in the path and make a pleasant dash to our
spiritual Goal Divine.
The world is recognised and we communicate with the world by
our mind. When this mind is merged in the Self, our world
perceptions must totally disappear into the vision of supreme Self,
the all-pervading Consciousness. Effortlessness is the essence of
the attitude of a Man of Perfection. He is a master idler (ālasya
dhurīṇaḥ), in the eyes of men of the world.
The instructions contained in these verses are really most
precious tips for the evolved sādhakas who are yet struggling in the
higher levels of meditation. These are meant for those who seem to
get themselves, again and again, forcibly necked out from the
blazing gateway of the heart's entrance! This chapter is most
effective for those students who jerk themselves into their ego sense
at the highest moments of their meditation, all by themselves, most
involuntarily.
अ ाव   उवाच
आच    णु  वा  तात  नानाशा ा नेकशः।
तथािप  न  तव   ा  ं  सव   िव रणा ते॥१॥
aṣṭāvakra uvāca
ācakṣva śruṇu vā tāta nānā-śāstrāṇyanekaśaḥ,
tathāpi na tava svāsthyaṁ sarva-vismaraṇād-ṛte. (1)
आच  – speak;  णु – hear; वा – or; तात – son; नाना  शा ािण – diverse
scriptures; अनेकशः  – many times and many ways; तथािप – still; न –
not; तव – your;  ा म ् – Self-abidance; सव   िव रणात् – through
forgetting all; ऋते – except
Aṣṭāvakra said:
1. My son! You may speak many times in many ways, upon the
various scriptures, or hear them. But you cannot get established in
the Self, unless you forget all.
As an absolutist, Sage Aṣṭāvakra, does not recognise the existence
of anything as God or the universe or the ego other than the one
transcendental Self. In the infinite Self, in Its homogeneous state,
there are no objects or thoughts. The perception of anything, be it or
within without the bosom, can be only the delusory imaginations of a
confused mind.
Therefore, the Teacher says, ‘You may study all the scriptures of
the world, nay, even become so proficient in the contents of the
Upaniṣads that you give eloquent discourses upon all of them; yet,
you have only understood the word meaning of the scriptures and
not the Truth that is indicated by these brilliant statements of the
scriptures. Until you realise this magnificent state of the peaceful
Self, Self-abidance (svāsthyam) cannot be gained.’
In the Self there is no universe of plurality. Hence, the seeker
must learn to forget all the memories of illusory objects experienced
in the past. This total forgetfulness (sarva vismaraṇa) alone is the
‘way’. Where the meditator forgets his body, mind and intellect and
his world of objects, emotions and thoughts, the perceiver-ego in him
ends, and this is the point wherein the ego disappears into the vision
of the Reality. Even the knowledge of the scriptures is only a
memory; it also crystallises the ego.
In fact, the ego itself is ‘a bundle of memories’. If a stranger
comes and asks you, ‘Who are you?’ – meaning, ‘Please explain the
individuality in you’, what you would talk from your autobiographical
story, are all nothing but memories. Wherein all memories are lost,
while in sleep, swooning, under chloroform or even in the state of
madness, therein the ego ends.
Today our mind is constantly preoccupied with the memories of
our past experiences and, therefore, we have forgotten our real
nature. This is the state of ‘bondage’. The state of ‘freedom’ is the
reverse of it. In that state you are not able to grasp any of your
phenomenal experiences, because you have merged into the higher
plane of Consciousness. The dream ends, when the waking comes.
The criticism of the mere book knowledge of paṇḍitas hinted here
in the verse echoes the loud condemnation of mere book knowledge
in the Kaṭhopaniṣad: ‘This Ᾱtman cannot be attained by study of the
Veda, nor by intelligence, nor by much hearing, It is gained by him
who chooses It alone; to him this Ᾱtman reveals Its true nature.’1
The same idea is vividly put in Pañcadaśī: ‘An intelligent student
after studying the text and after reflecting upon its ideas, again and
again, he must throw away all texts, as the seeker of the grains
throws away the husk.’2
Here ‘throw away’ means forget the letter of the text, and accept
and live the spirit of the text.
भोगं  कम समािधं  वा  कु    िव   तथािप  ते।
िच ं  िनर सवा शम थ   रोचिय ित॥२॥
bhogaṁ karma-samādhiṁ vā kuru vijña tathāpi te,
cittaṁ nirasta-sarvāśam-atyarthaṁ rocayiṣyati. (2)
भोगम् – enjoyment; कम  – work; समािधम्  – mental concentration; वा –
or; कु   – do; िव   – O! wise one; तथािप – yet; ते – your; िच म् – mind;
िनर सवा शम्  – in which all desires are extinguished; अ थ म्  – that
which is beyond objects; रोचिय ित – will you yearn for
2. O wise one! You may enjoy the world or undertake work or
practise mental concentration (samādhi). But your mind will still
yearn for your own true nature, which is beyond all objects and in
which all desires are extinguished.
The very fact that every man is impatient with his desires and wants
to fulfil them shows the inherent demand of the human mind to end
desiring and go beyond it. The mind getting restless for the
possession and enjoyment of an object is called ‘mind desiring for
that object’. This condition of the mind invites tremendous
disturbances and drags the individual away from his real nature of
peace and tranquillity. Confused and confounded the individualised
ego struggles hard to acquire and possess the objects of his desire.
When he thus fulfils the desire, there is a burst of peace and joy and
a foolish individual attributes this sense of satisfaction experienced in
him to the ‘object’ gained!
Viewed more scientifically, it would become easily clear that by
the fulfilment of a desire the mind has become calm and our real
spiritual nature is no more veiled by the thought curtain that was
raised by the mind in agitation.
This silent and eternal yearning of the human mind to realise its
real nature is the explanation why no man is totally satisfied by all
that he possesses. Even if he were to possess the whole universe,
still there is in him a sense of discontentment, a bitter taste of non-
fulfilment! Keeping this fundamental idea in mind, here the saintly
Teacher declares that a man may engage himself in sensuous
enjoyments or in fulfilling his duties or spend his time in a life of
secular or sacred contemplation.
Note carefully that here ‘enjoyment’ is at the level of mind, ‘work’
at the level of the body and ‘contemplation’ at the level of the
intellect. In spite of his so fully engaging himself at all the levels of
his personality, even if he be totally successful in all of them, still
there will be a residual sense of imperfection, ever nibbling at the
vitals of his heart, providing for him a lingering sense of
disappointment and dejection.
Man is never satisfied until he rediscovers his real nature beyond
all equipments and their objects of pleasure, beyond all passions
and desires.
आयासात्  सकलो  दुः खी  नैनं  जानाित  क न।
अनेनैवोपदेशेन  ध ः   ा ोित  िनवृ ितम्॥३॥
āyāsāt sakalo duḥkhī nainaṁ jānāti kaścana,
anenaivopadeśena dhanyaḥ prāpnoti nirvṛtim. (3)
आयासात्  – from efforts; सकलः  – all; दुः खी – miserable; न – not; एनम्  –
this; जानाित – knows; क न – anyone; अनेन – by this; एव – alone;
 े े ोि ि  ि
उपदेशेन – instruction; ध ः  – blessed one;  ा ोित – attains; िनवृ ितम्  –
Liberation
3. Because they exert themselves, all are unhappy. But none
(knows) appreciates this. Through this instruction alone the blessed
one attains Liberation.
When each member of the community is to scramble in a society to
fulfil their unbridled gush of desires, each will have to step on the
toes of the many and the many unconsciously are compelled to dig
at the ribs of each one in the community! Every individual is, in
honest freedom, striving to discover his happiness. Unfortunately, in
the world, desirable objects are less in number and the desirers are
many. If hundred people desire one and the same object, it is
evidently clear that ninety-nine of them will have to end in
disappointment. This daily struggle, artificially created by the total
stupidity of the entire community, has been glorified in the modern
secular age, by a glamorous term ‘healthy, competitive life’. Those
who stand apart and with their peaceful bosom, watch the
maddening cruelty of this meaningless struggle, they are compelled
to call the modern life of self-exhausting competitions as a ‘rat race
in a trap’. In whatever way we may glorify this way of life, in essence,
it is but the glorification of a tragedy!!
The exhausting exertions of life make everyone unhappy and the
paradox is that none understands this. We are reminded of words of
the Yogavāsiṣṭha: ‘In his ignorance of the supreme state, ever
exhausting himself in activities, tired with his constant anxiety for
results, alas! man never contemplates upon the Reality. There is no
greater state of existence than the silence of the mind, wherein all
vāsanās have been renounced.’3
This instruction is more than sufficient for any intelligent student
to understand where the harbour of life is and how to pilot the vessel
of his life, away from the treacherous sea of passions, into the safety
and security of the Self.
 ापारे   ख ते  य  ु  िनमेषो ेषयोरिप।
त ाल ध ुरीण   सुखं  ना    क िचत्॥४॥
vyāpāre khidyate yastu nimeṣonmeṣayorapi,
tasyālasya-dhurīṇasya sukhaṁ nānyasya kasyacit. (4)
 ापारे – in the activity;  ख ते – feels pain; यः  – who; तु – indeed;
िनमेष - उ ेषयोः  – of closing and opening the eyelids (winking); अिप –
even; त  - आल धुरीण  – of that master idler; सुखम्  – happiness; न
– not; अ    – other; क िचत्  – of anyone
4. Happiness belongs to that master idler who feels distressed even
at the effort of opening and closing his eyes! It belongs to none else.
Activities in the outer world are expressions of inner thought
disturbances. To the desireless, there is no ‘thought flow’; to such an
individual, who has transcended the mind, no physical activities are
ever possible.
He is in the Self, living the blissful, Infinite. He is unconscious of
his body, nor is his consciousness disturbed by the perception of the
world of plurality. This is the state of samādhi. Spontaneously to
maintain this experience as a constant way of life is a rare privilege
of the few and such a spiritual state is termed in terminology of
Vedānta as ‘sahaja samādhi’. In this state of abidance in Self, to
initiate a thought is the most painful fall and hence it is stated here:
‘Even winking is an insufferable affliction to him’.
From the standpoint of a sweating labourer, who is working in the
midday sun, a doctor in his comfortable air-conditioned operation
theatre is an idler! And the Chief Justice of the country, who is
working only for five days of the week and perhaps four hours a day,
is an escapist getting exorbitant pay for almost no work at all!!
From the standpoint of the noisy politician or a busy commercial
agent or a restless social worker, a scientist or a philosopher may
appear to be an idler! The subtler the field of investigation, the more
the intellect and the mind has to function in single pointed
concentration and the body then seems to relax with no apparent
activity outside. From the gross viewpoint of the thoughtless majority,
all such physical relaxations are labelled as idleness.
Thus viewed, a mystic meditator, at the seat of his meditation
experiencing the infinite tranquillity or the transcendental state,
should certainly be considered as the ‘master idler’. A wheel turning
on its oiled ball bearing at a tremendous velocity of thousands of
revolutions per second would appear to the human eye as inert and
motionless, while the slow moving water wheel would appear as
constantly in action!
In the most intense activity is an illusion of inaction. In this sense,
a man in samādhi would be considered in any society of vigorous
material activities as a ‘colossal idler’ (ālasya dhurīṇaḥ), to whom
even involuntary winking of his eyelids is an agony, a death pang!!
But we will never understand that this genius of idleness abides in
the absolute aloneness of the Self Divine.
इदं  कृ तिमदं  नेित     ैमु   ं  यदा  मनः।
धमा थ काममो ेषु  िनरपे ं  तदा  भवेत्॥५॥
idaṁ kṛtamidaṁ neti dvandvair-muktaṁ yadā manaḥ,
dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣeṣu nirapekṣaṁ tadā bhavet. (5)
इदम् – this; कृ तम्  – done; इदम् – this; न – not; इित – this;    ैः  – from
the pairs of opposites; मु म ्  – freed; यदा – when; मनः  – mind;
धमा थ काममो ेषु – in righteousness (work of religious merit), wealth
(worldly prosperity), desire (sensual enjoyment) and Liberation
(spiritual emancipation); िनरपे म्  – indifferent; तदा – then; भवेत्  –
becomes
5. When the mind is free from such pairs of opposites as ‘this is
done’ and ‘this is not yet done’, it becomes indifferent to
righteousness, wealth, desire and Liberation.
So long as we are conditioned by and functioning in the mind, we
cannot escape the plurality of experiences. There cannot be joy
without sorrow and sorrow has no meaning without joy. A white dot
on a white paper is not perceptible. In order to recognise whiteness
there must be a black background; a black spot against a white
background alone is perceivable. Thus heat and cold, joy and sorrow
and such other pairs of opposites are all not quite contrary and
different factors but they are the two ‘poles’ of the same experience.
We cannot ever have a magnet without a south and a north pole!
On transcending the mind, these relative fields of experiences
are transcended and to such an individual there are no more any
‘goals’ to be reached.
In the Hindu way of life, we have already mentioned earlier, the
‘goals’ to be aspired for, in different stages of man's growth, are laid
out as (1) righteousness (work of religious merit), (2) wealth (worldly
prosperity), (3) desire fulfilments (sensual enjoyment) and (4)
Liberation (spiritual emancipation). To one who is living in the Self, all
these worldly goals have no meaning or purpose. He has no more
duties to, nor has he any rights in, the social systems of human
communities. There cannot be a duty without desire; he has become
desireless. If he is served by the world, it is only for his wisdom and
clarity of vision – the state of perfection in which he revels in his
higher Consciousness.
िवर ो  िवषय े ा  रागी  िवषयलोलुपः।
 हमो िवहीन ु  न  िवर ो  न  रागवान्॥६॥
virakto viṣaya-dveṣṭā rāgī viṣaya-lolupaḥ,
graha-mokṣa-vihīnastu na virakto na rāgavān. (6)
ि ि े
िवर ः  – not-sensual, unattached; िवषय े ा – one who has aversion
for sense objects; रागी – attached; िवषयलोलुपः  – one who hankers
after sense objects;  हमो िवहीनः  – one who does not accept or
reject; तु – but; न – not; िवर ः  – unattached; न – not; रागवान्  –
attached, sensual
6. One who has aversion for sense objects is considered as 'not-
sensual', and one who covets them is ‘sensual’. But he who does not
accept or reject is neither 'sensual' nor 'not-sensual'.
From the standpoint of a Man of Perfection, since he is awakened to
the pure Consciousness, there is no world of plurality nor a mind in
him that should consciously accept the world or reject it. The play of
the mind in the world of objects, with passion and lust, is called
sensuality. When the mind abhors the sense objects and rebounds
from them, then the mind is ‘not-sensual’. When there are no objects
perceivable, nor is there a perceiving mind, there can neither be
acceptance nor rejection, neither can you label such an individual as
‘sensuous’ nor as ‘not-sensuous’.
हेयोपादेयता  तावत्  संसार  िवटपाङ् कु रः।
  ृहा  जीवित  याव ै  िनिव चारदशा दम्॥७॥
heyopādeyatā tāvat saṁsāra viṭapāṅkuraḥ,
spṛhā jīvati yāvadvai nirvicāra-daśāspadam. (7)
हेेयोपादेयता – the sense of acceptance and aversion; तावत्  – so long;
संसारिवटपाङ् कु रः  – the branch and sprout of saṁsāra;   ृहा – desire;
जीवित – lives; यावत्  – as long as; वै – indeed; िनिव चार  दशा दम्  – the
seat of the state of non-discrimination
7. As long as desire, which is the root of the state of non-
discrimination, exists, so long there will indeed be the sense of
acceptance and aversion which are the branch and sprout of the tree
of saṁsāra.
We are reminded of the brilliant examination, of the ‘path of fall’ of
man through careless mental life, in the Bhagavad-gītā: ‘When a
man thinks of objects, attachment for them arises; from attachment
desire is born; from desire arises anger; from anger comes delusion;
from delusion loss of memory; from loss of memory the destruction
of discrimination; from destruction of discrimination he perishes.4
Desires are the very springs of non-discrimination, inasmuch as
the mind that is stormed by desires loses its ability to judge the
situations correctly. When our understanding is weak, we will be
tossed about in the confusion of acceptance and aversion, likes and
dislikes, towards the available objects around us. Aṣṭāvakra
describes here that the entire tree of worldly life (saṁsāra) stems
forth from desires; the branches and twigs of the ‘tree of life’ are all
constituted of the individual's likes and dislikes, love and aversion.
 वृ ौ  जायते  रागो  िनवृ ौ   ेष  एव  िह।
िन    ो  बालव ीमानेवमेव   व  थतः॥८॥
pravṛttau jāyate rāgo nivṛttau dveṣa eva hi,
nirdvandvo bālavad-dhīmān-evam-eva vyavasthitaḥ. (8)
 वृ ौ – in activity; जायते – is born; रागः  – attachment; िनवृ ौ – in
abstention;  ेषः  – aversion; एव – surely; िह – indeed; िन    ः  – free
from the pairs of opposites; बालवत्  – like a child; धीमान्  – the wise
man; एवम् – thus; एव – indeed;  व  थतः  – is established
8. Activity begets attachment and abstention from it generates
aversion. The wise man is free from the pairs of opposites, like a
child and indeed, is well-established in the Self.
Without desire activity is impossible. The more we act in a field, our
desires in that field increase. Mental entanglements with the world
outside are attachment. Thus ‘activity begets attachment’.
Certain fields of activities are rejected by us because we know
that they are not conducive to us. This rejection or abstention implies
our aversion towards certain kinds of experiences. The liberated is
free from all pairs of opposites; he has neither attachment nor
aversion. He lives in the infinite bliss of the Self and, therefore, he
meets life head-on, as it comes to greet him! He neither runs after
objects, nor runs away from them. Such a man is well-established in
the Self Divine.
Here Aṣṭāvakra uses the very familiar and popular simile used to
describe a wise man, ‘like a child’. In almost all the scriptures this
simile is used to explain the attitude of a Man of Perfection in his
dealings with the world around him. This is to be carefully analysed
and understood. If once we remove our sentimental prejudices and
come to judge scientifically, it must be confessed that a child is an
idiot, as it has not yet developed its powers of judgement and its
faculty of rational thinking. To compare a wise man to a child is,
therefore, obviously unhappy, unbecoming. But in all scriptures we
find it repeated; then, there must be, for it, a deeper and valid
significance.
A child expresses both anger and love according to its mood of
the moment. But the child immediately forgets its earlier mood;
meaning, the child refuses to poison the present moment with the
memories of its past moments! In short, a wise man, like a child,
meets every moment afresh; he never allows the memories of the
past to muddy his present nor does a wise man break the harmony
of the present with the discordant notes of his own anxiety for the
future. Moment-to-moment he lives happily, dynamically, boldly
facing his circumstances around him and his moods within. It is in
this sense that we must understand a wise man’s life, when it is
described as ‘like a child’.
 ि ि ी ि
हातुिम ित  संसारं  रागी  दुः खिजहासया।
वीतरागो  िह  िनदु ः ख    िप  न   ख ित॥९॥
hātum-icchati saṁsāraṁ rāgī duḥkha-jihāsayā,
vītarāgo hi nirduḥkhas-tasminnapi na khidyati. (9)
हातुम्  – to renounce; इ ित – desires; संसारम् – world; रागी – one who
is attached; दुः खिजहासया – wishing to avoid sorrow; वीतरागः  – one
who is free from attachment; िह – indeed; िनदु ः खः  – free from misery;
त  न्  – therein; अिप – even; न – not;  ख ित – feels miserable
9. One who is attached to the world, wants to renounce it in order to
avoid its miseries; but one without attachment is free from sorrow
and does not feel miserable even in the world.
The general notion of the thoughtless majority is that they are
suffering because of the world. The world is constituted of inert
matter and the objects outside can really never convey, all by
themselves, any misery or joy to man's mind. An object can give us
joy only when it is conducive to our mind; when an object is contrary
to our mental demand, that object gives us sorrow. To a smoker
cigarette is a joy; to the non-smoker that very same cigarette is a
sorrow.
It is the human mind's valuation, demands and cravings that lend
the power and the might to the inert objects to molest man with their
joys and sorrows. An ordinary worldly man, living his egocentric life
of passions and desires, feels exhausted and shattered by the
miseries that are supplied by the world of circumstances around him.
These repeated lashes of sorrows and tragedies goad man to
renounce the world and seek a more satisfactory and happy
condition of existence, wherein he can feel a better sense of
fulfilment.
A Man of Perfection has no demand or desire and therefore, no
attachment with the world around him. When he lives in perfect
detachment, there is an extra inner freedom of the mind and the
world around him must then fail to convey to him either joy or sorrow.
With his bosom emptied of the monstrous ego sense, he lives fully in
his inner happiness, under all conditions and circumstances. A wise
man, thus abiding in his Self, is unattached to the world of objects
and beings. Even in hell he cannot be miserable; the Bliss in him is
infinite.
य ािभमानो  मो ेऽिप  देहेऽिप  ममता  तथा।
न  च   ानी  न  वा  योगी  के वलं  दुः खभागसौ॥१०॥
yasyābhimāno mokṣe'pi dehe'pi mamatā tathā,
na ca jñānī na vā yogī kevalaṁ duḥkhabhāgasau. (10)
य   – whose; अिभमानः  – vanity, ego sense; मो े – in Liberation; अिप –
even; देहे – in the body; अिप – even; ममता – sense of possessiveness
or mine-ness; तथा – also; न – not; च – and;  ानी – wise; न – not; वा –
or; योगी – yogin; के वलम्  – only; दुः खभाक्  – sufferer of misery; असौ –
he
10. He who has an ego sense even towards Liberation and he who
considers even his body as his own, he is neither a jñānī nor a yogin.
He is merely a sufferer of misery.
Sense of ‘doership’ and ‘enjoyership’ together constitute the ego and
so long as the ego revels in the bosom of a man, he cannot have
any spiritual vision or divine experience. The very vanity that he is a
spiritual seeker or that he has spiritual experiences crystallises his
ego sense and so he cannot enter into the total state of absolute
Bliss. Similarly, if there is a vague sense of possession of the body
and even a dim anxiety for its security and comfort, the consequent
sense of limitations, fattens the ‘ego’ and the experience
transcendental gets clouded off immediately!
Aṣṭāvakra declares that when one has the ego sense and the
self-conceit towards Liberation – ‘I am liberated’ – or when one has a
sense of possession even towards his body – ‘this is my body’ –
such an individual is neither a jñānī nor a yogin. As he has not freed
himself from his sense of ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’, he should get
necessarily tossed about, by his own likes and dislikes, in a world of
restless miseries.
हरो  यद् युपदे ा  ते  ह रः  कमलजोऽिप  वा।
तथािप  न  तव   ा  ं  सव   िव रणा ते॥११॥
haro yadyupadeṣṭā te hariḥ kamalajo'pi vā,
tathāpi na tava svāsthyaṁ sarva-vismaraṇād-ṛte. (11)
हरः  – Śiva; यिद – if; उपदे ा – instructor; ते – your; ह रः  – Viṣṇu; कमलजः
– lotus born, Creator Brahmā; अिप – even; वा – or; तथािप – yet; न –
not; तव – your;  ा म ् – abidance in the Self; सव   िव रणात्  ऋते –
without forgetting all
11. Even if Śiva, Viṣṇu or the lotus born Creator – Brahmā – be your
instructor, yet, unless you forget all, you cannot achieve abidance in
the Self.
There is no meaning in complaining about the quality and ability of
the spiritual Teachers. Their capacity to convey experiences to the
students are limited and the grace lies not in the Guru but in the
students themselves. The seekers themselves block their minds
from the flood of spiritual grace that reaches them from their
Teachers. This blockage is built up by the seekers, own memories of
the past experiences in the world of plurality. We had already shown
earlier that the bundle of all one’s memories together constitutes the
‘ego’.
Unless these are obliterated, destroyed and discarded, the ego
cannot be eliminated and the flight to the infinite Self can never
happen. In order to emphasise this idea, Aṣṭāvakra here exclaims
that even if you get direct instructions and guidance from the Trinity
themselves, yet, the student cannot awake to the higher plane of
Godhood unless he, himself, cuts off his attachments to his past
memories.
Yogavāsiṣṭha exclaims: ‘Even Lord Mādhava cannot give wisdom to
the one who has not contemplated upon the Self, even though he
may be one who has for long worshipped the Lord and is one who
has supreme devotion for the Lord.’5
1 nāyamātmā pravacanena labhyo na medhayā na bahunā śrutena,
yamevaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyastasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute tanūṁ svām.
– Kaṭhopaniṣad-1.2.23
2 granthamabhyasya medhāvī jñānavijñānatatparaḥ
palālamiva dhānyārthī tyajet granthamaśeṣataḥ. – Pañcadaśī-1.5.46
3 ajñānātaparamārthena kriyāmātre ca tiṣṭhati,
phalakārpaṇyayuktena puṁsā tattvaṁ na cintyate. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-3.96.52
…………………………………
santyaktavāsanānmaunādṛte nāstyuttamaṁ padam. – Yogavāsiṣṭha
4 dhyāyato viṣayānpuṁsaḥ saṅgasteṣūpajāyate,
saṅgātsañjāyate kāmaḥ kāmātkrodho'bhijāyate.
krodhādbhavati saṁmohaḥ saṁmohatsmṛtivibhramaḥ,
smṛtibhraṁśād buddhināśo buddhināśātpraṇaśyati. – Bhagavad-gītā-2.62.63
5 ciramārādhito'pyeṣa paramaprītimānapi,
nāvicāravato jñānaṁ dātuṁ śaknoti mādhavaḥ. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-5.43.10

Chapter 17
Aloneness of the Self
Introduction
The rhythm in the thought development here adds an enchanting
extra beauty to the chapter. Verse after verse adds to the total
picture of a Man of Perfection living amidst us and yet totally
unaffected by the endless miseries, which we are all destined to
suffer in this world. Though such descriptions of physical behaviours,
mental attitudes and intellectual reactions of a Man of Perfection to
the world of objects, emotions and thoughts are met with in our
literature of Upaniṣad, they are unfortunately lying very much
scattered in the gardens of the Vedas.
Bhagavān Vyāsa did collect them and Lord Kṛṣṇa tied them up
into an attractive bouquet and presented it to the Pāṇḍava prince in
the battlefield of Mahābhārata, during the close of the second
discourse, in His immortal Bhagavad-gītā. Here we find in this
chapter Aṣṭāvakra strings these ideas together, not into a bouquet to
be held in the hand or kept in a vase, but as a garland for the student
to wear constantly around his neck!
This chapter sings a hymn to the aloneness of the Self (kaivalya).
The one blissful Self envelopes all. In that state of Bliss, one who
has awakened to the pure Consciousness finds that all his desires
have ended; all goals have been reached; even his anxiety for
Liberation ceases. His mind rolls away; all its agitations suddenly
calm themselves into an infinite dynamic peace all by themselves,
spontaneously!! The body and the senses halt in their functions. Far
beyond all traces of identification with the body, mind and intellect,
calm and serene, the seeker now comes to experience the kaivalya
state of the Self, all-pervading and immutable.
To extol this state of Self-realisation and also to encourage others
to walk this noble path of seeking the Self, the sage vividly paints
here the nature of Man of Wisdom. The chapter expounds the
fabulous rewards enjoyed by the man who has unfolded himself to
experience the infinite Self. Here is a complete word picture of the
Man of Perfection, in a twenty poetic strokes, on the canvas of the
student's mind, held steady in his deep meditations.
अ ाव   उवाच
तेन   ानफलं   ा  ं  योगा ासफलं  तथा।
तृ ः     े   यो  िन मेकाकी  रमते  तु  यः॥१॥
aṣṭāvakra uvāca
tena jñāna-phalaṁ prāptaṁ yogābhyāsa-phalaṁ tathā,
tṛptaḥ svacchendriyo nityam-ekākī ramate tu yaḥ. (1)
तेन – by whom;  ानफलम्  – fruit of knowledge;  ा म् – has gained;
योगअ ासफलम् – the fruit of practice of yoga; तथा – as well as; तृ ः  –
contented;    े   यः  – purified in his senses; िन म्  – ever; एकाकी –
alone; रमते – revels; तु – indeed; यः  – who
Aṣṭāvakra said:
1. He has gained the fruit of knowledge as well as the fruit of practice
of yoga, who, contented and purified in his senses, ever revels in his
'aloneness' indeed.
Until the seeker gets awakened to this transcendental state of pure
Awareness, neither his jñāna nor his yoga is fulfilled. Seeking is
fulfilled only in gaining the sought. In its great awakening, only when
the ego merges into the infinite Self, where nothing else exists, in the
state of aloneness is the goal reached, the destination arrived, the
supreme state of total satisfaction gained. In this awakening alone,
can all seeking end.
Describing the approach to this gateway of the state of ‘perfection
and narrating the experience of aloneness’ therein, with a unique
beauty of an arresting drama, Prahlāda sings in Yogavāsiṣṭha.
Prahlāda describes the experience of his mind as it gets dissolved
into samādhi: ‘Lo! my mind has expanded even beyond the
Brahmaloka to embrace the Reality and even now, it is still
expanding. I cannot call it back again now anymore.....’1
We must carefully note that even at this moment Prahlāda is still
a saṁsārīn, because he is aware of his mind's expansion and he still
claims that he is a mind; he has still the 'ego' in him. This is the state
of 'savikalpa samādhi'; residual ego is here only panting in its death
agony, but not yet dead!
In the final stage Yogavāsiṣṭha, declares the mystic words of the
perfect Master, the fulfilled God in Prahlāda: ‘Lord Hari of the name
of Prahlāda is me alone and there is no Hari other than me. This is
my true realisation. I pervade everywhere and am within
everything.’2
This state of aloneness (kaivalya) is the state of supreme and
infinite Consciousness, the state of nirvikalpa samādhi.
न  कदािच ग   न्  त  ो  ह    ख ित।
यत  एके न  तेनेदं  पूण     ा म लम ्॥२॥
na kadācijjagatyasmin tattvajño hanta khidyati,
yata ekena tenedaṁ pūrṇaṁ brahmāṇḍa-maṇḍalam. (2)
 ि ि  
न – not; कदािचत् – ever; जगित  – in the world; अ  न्  – this; त  ः  –
knower of Truth; ह  – Oh;  ख ित – feels misery; यतः – for; एके न –
alone; तेन – by himself; इदम् – this; पूण म्  – filled;   ा   म लम्  –
whole universe
2. Oh! The knower of Truth knows no misery in this world, for the
whole universe is filled by himself alone.
To recognise the world as something different from you is to feel
immediately the insignificant existence of yourself in the total
existence of the cosmos. Thereafter the limited body, mind and
intellect feel mercilessly crashed by the crowded universe spread all
around. You feel alienated from the grand total and in this lies the
roots of all your miseries. The individual in you then struggles hard to
acquire and to possess, at least a part of the universe to be his own,
whereby he feels he mitigated much of his growing sense of
alienation!
The ego can recognise the world only through its instruments of
sense organs, mind and intellect. As a limited ego it cannot but feel
flabbergasted at the force, might and extent of the universe around
it. Hence its miseries.
To the sage who has discovered himself to be the Self, the
universe is nothing but waves of disturbances rising in him, the
ocean of Consciousness. He realises his oneness with the entire
universe. There is no more, in him, any sense of alienation. The
whole universe is filled up by himself alone and, therefore, the
‘Knower of Truth knows no misery ever in this world’.
The Hindu textbooks are never satisfied by glorifying such a
perfect sage. In Bhāgavata we read Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself confessing:
‘The peaceful sage who in his equal vision moves about in the world
with hatred to none, ever free, I constantly follow him from behind,
seeking to purify Myself with the dust of his feet.’3
 ि े ि   ी
न  जातु  िवषयाः  के ऽिप   ारामं  हष य मी।
स कीप व ीतिमवेभि  प वाः ॥३॥
na jātu viṣayāḥ ke'pi svārāmaṁ harṣayantyamī,
sallakī-pallava-prītam-ivebhan-nimba-pallavāḥ. (3)
न – not; जातु – at any time; िवषयाः  – objects; के  अिप – any;  ारामम् –
one contented in the Self; हष य   – please; अमी – those;
स कीप व ीतम्  – who delights in sallakī leaves; इव – as; इभम् –
elephant; िन प वाः  – leaves of the margosa (nīma) tree
3. No sense objects ever please the one who is contented in the
Self, just as the margosa (nīma) leaves do not please an elephant
who delights in sallakī leaves.
More delicious in taste are the sallakī leaves for an elephant. An
elephant who is fed on this most satisfying diet, will he ever feel
attracted towards the bitter nīma leaves, however green and tender
they may be? The sage, who is living in the infinite Bliss of the Self,
is so completely contented and fulfilled in his experience of the
universal Self, how can he ever get enchanted by the bitter ridden
illusory joys of the miserable sense objects?
In Yogavāsiṣṭha we read a brilliant description of the infinite Bliss
experienced by the sage in his Self: ‘The joy that fills a mind, which
is thoughtless and undisturbed, such a perfect joy is not found in the
pleasing moon, nor in the palace of the Creator, nor for the king of
gods, Indra, himself.’4
य  ु  भोगेषु  भु  ेषु  न  भव िधवािसताः।
अभु  ेषु  िनराका ी  ता शो  भवदुल भः॥४॥
yastu bhogeṣu bhukteṣu na bhavatyadhivāsitāḥ,
abhukteṣu nirākāṅkṣī tādṛśo bhava-durlabhaḥ. (4)
 ो े े
यः  – who; तु – indeed; भोगेषु – in the object of enjoyment; भु  ेषु –
experienced; न – not; भवित – is; अिधवािसताः  – on whom impressions
are left; अभु  ेषु – in things not yet enjoyed; िनराका ी – not hankering
after; ता शः  – such a one; भवदुल भः  – rare in the world
4. Rare in the world is he on whom impressions are not left of things
which he had experienced or one who does not hanker after things
not yet enjoyed.
He is a sage who has dissolved his ego in the experience of his
oneness with the universal Self. Thereafter he meets the world as it
turns up, meeting experiences from moment-to-moment, with a
spontaneity which never gets dimmed by his anxiety to enjoy or his
hunger to repeat his experiences. Egoless actions are always
unmotivated and they are play of body-mind equipments. Egoless
activities cannot leave any impressions; they are expressions of the
past (prārabdha). Therefore, Aṣṭāvakra indicates that the pseudo
activities of a Man of Perfection cannot entangle him with their
vāsanās.
Being the infinite blissful Self himself, the sage can entertain no
restless desires seeking fulfilment in the empty sense objects. His
bodily functions are all apparent activities seen by the worldly men
around, but they cannot entrap the personality of the sage. He
belongs to a category totally different from ours; he is a law unto
himself!!
बुभु ु रह  संसारे  मुमु ुरिप    त े।
भोगमो िनराका ी  िवरलो  िह  महाशयः॥५॥
bubhukṣuriha saṁsāre mumukṣurapi dṛśyate,
bhoga-mokṣa-nirākāṅkṣī viralo hi mahāśayaḥ. (5)
बुभु ुः  – one who seeks worldly enjoyments; इह – here; संसारे – in the
world; मुमु ुः  – one who desires Liberation; अिप – also;   त े – is
 ो ो ि ी
seen; भोगमो िनराका ी – not desirous of enjoyment or Liberation;
िवरलः  – rare; िह – indeed; महाशयः  – noble-minded sage
5. Those who seek worldly enjoyments and those desirous of
Liberation, both are found in this world. But rare indeed is the noble-
minded sage who is not desirous of either enjoyment or Liberation.
For one who is hungry, it is natural that he will be anxious to enjoy
his dinner. One who is drowning, certainly, he is anxious to be saved.
A miserable and imperfect individualised entity must necessarily
seek the satisfaction of his sense objects. The limited must revolt
against his bondages and should be impatient to liberate his own
personality. A sage who has already liberated himself from the
thraldom of matter and who has realised the infinite Bliss, he,
thereafter, ‘is not desirous of either enjoyment or Liberation’. Of
course, such a perfect sage (mahāśaya) is indeed very rare.
धमा थ काममो ेषु  जीिवते  मरणे  तथा।
क ा  ुदारिच    हेयोपादेयता  न  िह॥६॥
dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣeṣu jīvite maraṇe tathā,
kasyāpyudāra-cittasya heyopādeyatā na hi. (6)
धम  – piety; अथ  – wealth (worldly prosperity); काम – desire (sensual
enjoyment); मो   – Liberation (spiritual emancipation); जीिवते – in life;
मरणे – in death; तथा – as well as; क   अिप – rare; उदारिच   – of a
broad-minded person; हेय  उपादेयता – attraction or aversion; न – not;
िह – indeed
6. Rare is the broad-minded person who has neither attraction for
nor aversion to piety, worldly prosperity, desire fulfilment and
Liberation as well as any attraction for life or aversion to death.
The four different 'goals' in life, indicated by the Hindu ṛṣis as
wayside halting places enroute the pilgrimage to the ultimate Self,
are all disciplines for the ego to lift itself from its present state of
consciousness onto the infinite plane of God-consciousness. So long
as the ego persists, duties pertaining to these four ‘goals’ of life are
to be certainly respected and followed faithfully, as they can prepare
the ego for its final merger in the infinite Self.
Rare indeed, is that Man of Wisdom, the true sage, who has risen
above these four worldly ‘goals’ of life, meaning who has ended his
ego and, therefore, has become indifferent to all of them, nay, even
to life and death.
Life and death are conditions of the body, over which the ego
alone can, in its delusion, grow anxious! To the immortal Self the
existence or the absence of the illusory body is of no consequence
at all. Why should the ocean worry over the birth and death of a
wave?
वा ा  न  िव िवलये  न   ेष    च    थतौ।
यथा  जीिवकया  त ा    आ े  यथासुखम्॥७॥
vāñchā na viśva-vilaye na dveṣastasya ca sthitau,
yathā jīvikayā tasmād-dhanya āste yathā-sukham. (7)
वा ा  – longing; न – not; िव िवलये – in the dissolution of the universe;
न – not;  ेषः  – aversion; त   – its; च – and;   थतौ – in existence; यथा
जीिवकया – with whatever living (subsistence) turns up by itself; त ात्
– so; ध ः  – the blessed one; आ े – lives; यथासुखम्  – happily
7. The Man of Wisdom does not feel any longing for the dissolution
of the universe or any aversion towards its existence. He, the
blessed one, therefore, lives happily in whatever subsistence turns
up, as his lot, unasked.
Living in the Self as the Self, the Man of Wisdom has gained all that
is to be gained. He has no desires for anything. He demands
nothing. He is above all needs. He is full. The whole universe is to
him a disturbance in the infinite Consciousness which is his own
nature. In That, this universe is a dust particle; where is then his
physical body? Whether it exists or not can be of no concern for him.
He has pulled down the veil of ‘ignorance’ in him and he has
rediscovered his divine nature. He has no identification with his body
any more.
Such a sage is not anxious any longer for the dissolution of the
universe; he has no aversion towards its play of plurality. The Man of
Truth has awakened from all his illusions.
Yet from our viewpoint he is still a member of the community with
a physical body and should not, at least, his body have the bare
necessities of existence – food, clothing and shelter? Aṣṭāvakra
explains that a Man of Perfection lives in his own world of perfect
Bliss and his body continues its existence living upon whatever
comes to him unasked. Such a Master, though he lives with us, is no
more a native of this world.
कृ ताथ ऽनेन   ानेने  ेवं  गिलतधीः  कृ ती।
प न ्   ृ न ्    ृशन्  िज न्  अ न्  आ े  यथासुखम्॥८॥
kṛtārtho'nena jñānenetyevaṁ galita-dhīḥ kṛtī,
paśyan śṛṇvan spṛśan jighran aśnan āste yathāsukham. (8)
कृ ताथ ः  – fulfilled; अनेन – by this;  ानेन – by wisdom; इित एवम् – thus;
गिलतधीः  – with the mind absorbed; कृ ती – contented; प न ्  - seeing;
 ृ न ्  – hearing;   ृशन्  – touching; िज न्  – smelling; अ न्  – eating;
आ े – lives; यथासुखम्  – happily
8. Being fulfilled by this wisdom of the Self and with his mind
absorbed and contented in the Self, the wise man lives happily –
seeing, hearing, touching, smelling and eating.
Human mind asserts in its restlessness only when it is under the
thraldom of its discontentment. When the mind is discontented,
desires rise to generate storms in the thought content of the mind.
Seeking fulfilment through its desire gratifications in the sense world,
the mind dashes into the world of objects, to acquire and to enjoy.
The mind of the Man of Perfection has discovered a complete
sense of fulfilment in the experience of the infinite Self and,
therefore, there is no question of his mind roaming away from him,
into the world of sense pleasures, of its own initiative. He remains at
peace with himself and with the world around.
He is in harmony with everything as they are around him, under
all circumstances. Externally when the world lashes on him, he
receives them, but he never reacts to them! Inwardly, in his supreme
happiness he lives – seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating – in
short, he never runs away from the world, nor has he any aversion
towards the world. Assimilating sense experiences he spends his
days peacefully, eating in the world through all his mouths! It is not
external behaviour, but the state of his inner Consciousness that
distinguishes a Man of Knowledge from an ordinary worldly
sensuous being. Since the wise man lives in the same world,
externally he must behave as any other human being. In his inner
wisdom alone he is a superman, not in anything else.
शू ा   ि वृ था  चे ा  िवकलानी  यािण  च।
न    ृहा  न  िवर  वा    ीणसंसारसागरे॥९॥
śūnyā dṛṣtir-vṛthā ceṣṭā vikalānīndriyāṇi ca,
na spṛhā na viraktirvā kṣīṇa-saṁsāra-sāgare. (9)
शू ा  – vacant;  ि ः  – look; वृथा – purposeless; चे ा – action; िवकलािन
– inoperative; इ  यािण  – senses; च – and; न – not;   ृहा –
attachment; न – not; िवर  ः  – aversion; वा – or;  ीणसंसारसागरे – for
one in whom the ocean of the world has dried down
9. There is no attachment or aversion for one in whom the ocean of
the world has dried up. His gaze becomes vacant. His bodily actions
are purposeless and his senses inoperative.
Even after having awakened to the larger plane of consciousness,
his body has to remain in our plane and act according to the laws of
the human behaviour in his society. Never does he lose sight of his
own inner kingdom of the experience of the Self. This is a kind of
Liberated in life (Jīvanmukta). He lives in a state of unbroken
samādhi even while he is living and acting as a member of the
community.
‘His gaze is vacant’ because even when he is looking at the world
of objects, he is seeing nothing but the continuous play of the infinite
Self. His actions are not springing forth from any definite motive or
profit nor have they any purpose to fulfil. They are spontaneous
actions, not reactions, from the vāsanās in himself, because he has
none.
His ‘senses have become inoperative’ inasmuch as in the
ordinary man the senses bring into his bosom the enchanting
informations regarding the fabulous world around. The Man of
Perfection sees, hears, smells, tastes and touches; his senses are
functioning; but none of them can bring their share of storms into the
bosom of the sage, since his mind has already merged in the
universal Consciousness.
In short, in his saṁsāra, the devastating storms of thoughts have
ceased. ‘In him the ocean of the world has dried up’. Therefore, he is
standing at the bottom of the ocean and no longer swimming among
the heaving bosom of the relentless waves. To such a wise man, so
firmly established in the substratum, there can be neither any
attachment nor aversion towards the outer world of objects, of
beings and of happenings.
न  जागित   न  िन ाित  नो ीलित  न  मीलित।
अहो  परदशा   ािप  वत ते  मु च ेतसः॥१०॥
na jāgarti na nidrāti nonmīlati na mīlati,
aho paradaśā kvāpi vartate mukta-cetasaḥ. (10)
न – not; जागित  – keeps awake; न – not; िन ाित – sleeps; न – not;
उ ीलित – opens his eyes; न – not; मीलित – closes his eyes; अहो –
Oh; परदशा – the supreme state of Consciousness;    अिप –
anywhere; वत ते – is; मु च ेतसः – the liberated soul
10. The Man of Wisdom neither keeps awake nor sleeps. He neither
opens nor closes his eyes. Oh! The liberated soul anywhere enjoys
the supreme state of Consciousness.
The inner state of a Man of Perfection revelling in his enlightenment
is difficult to comprehend and much more difficult to express. Even
the most suggestive diction can give us but a set of pleasant
contradictions rather than a sustained intelligent description. In the
Bhagavad-gītā also Lord Kṛṣṇa had exhausted Himself in trying to
describe the state and the Lord also had failed as much as the ṛṣis of
Upaniṣads themselves when he says: ‘That which is night to all
beings, in that the self-controlled man wakes; where all beings are
awake, that is the night for the sage (Muni) who sees.’5
The liberated is identified here with ultimate ever shining Self and
hence the difficulty for us to comprehend such a divine Being. He
never ‘keeps awake’ in the sense that in all the waking moments we
are living in a world of perceptions, with which we react with our likes
and dislikes. The wise man is ‘never awake’ to our world of
sensuality and its enchantments; he is ‘awake’ to the state of
Selfhood.
He ‘never sleeps’ meaning inertia (tamas) can no longer affect
his Consciousness and make It dull and dim, unable to recognise
Itself. We are asleep to the great and divine presence in our bosom;
the wise man ‘never sleeps’ like us!
He ‘never winks’. Winking is the physical expression of one's
mental and intellectual restlessness. Animals do not wink; intelligent
man alone winks. That the Master has not any mental agitations, is
all that is meant when Sage Aṣṭāvakra characterises a Liberated
man as one who ‘never winks’.
In spite of all these hints, the state of a Man of Wisdom cannot be
intelligible to us. He is unique. He is understood only by yet another
sage! He is totally dead to the relative world of plurality and yet,
cannot be considered as ‘sleeping’ as he is ever awake to the joyous
state of the blissful Self.
सव      त े    थः  सव    िवमलाशयः।
सम वासनामु ो  मु ः  सव    राजते॥११॥
sarvatra dṛśyate svasthaḥ sarvatra vimalāśayaḥ,
samasta-vāsanā-mukto muktaḥ sarvatra rājate. (11)
सव   – everywhere;   त े – is seen;   थः  – abiding in the Self; सव  
– always; िवमलआशयः  – undefiled by desires; सम   वासनामु ः  – free
from all vāsanās; मु ः  – liberated person; सव   – under all
conditions; राजते – revels
11. The liberated one is found everywhere abiding in the Self and is
undefiled by desires under all conditions. Freed from all vāsanās, he
revels.
In the verse, three times, the term ‘sarvatra’ is repeated; this is to
indicate at all places, at all times, under all conditions. A Man of
Perfection, irrespective of place, time and condition, is untouched by
passions and desires. Liberated from all his vāsanā entanglements,
he revels in his own supreme glory. He has realised his oneness with
all-full Self and as the infinite blissful Self, he has no more desires.
He has no vāsanās as he has transcended the causal body, which is
otherwise called ‘ignorance’ (avidyā). On realising the Self, the non-
apprehension of Reality (ignorance) has ended in him.
प न ्    न ्    ृशन्  िज न्  अ न्  गृ न्  वदन्   जन्।
ईिहतानीिहतैमु  ो  मु   एव  महाशयः॥१२॥
paśyan śṛṇvan spṛśan jighran aśnan gṛhṇan vadan vrajan,
īhitān-īhitair-mukto mukta eva mahāśayaḥ. (12)
प न ्  – seeing;   न ्  – hearing;   ृशन्  – touching; िज न्  – smelling;
अ न्  – eating; गृ न्  – accepting; वदन्  – speaking;  जन्  – walking;
ईिहतान्  ईिहतैः  मु ः  – free from attachment and aversion; मु   –
liberated; एव – indeed; महाशयः  – the noble-minded one
12. Seeing, hearing, touching, smelling, eating, accepting, speaking
and walking, the noble-minded one, free from all attachments and
aversions, is indeed liberated.
The Man of Perfection, liberated from the snares of life, does not run
away from this world, but he has to continue living in this very same
world of ours so long as his physical body lingers about him. He
responds to the external stimuli, with all the instruments of action
and perception, exactly like any other man in the world. The
uniqueness of the Man of Perfection is not in the complete cessation
of all his activities in the world outside, but in the quality of his heart
wherein there will not be even a trace of attachment! Since he has
no vāsanās of his own, he is no more reacting with the world outside
as we do and we cannot but entertain some attachments and,
therefore, some aversions.
The expressive language of Sanskrit has an eloquence of its
own, which is never seen in any other language in the world. The
term used here ‘īhitān-īhitaiḥ’ stems from the root ‘iha’ which means
‘ambition’ (vāñchā), ‘desire’ (icchā), ‘action’ (ceṣṭā) and ‘effort’
(udyama). Thus the phrase used by Aṣṭāvakra is so commodious
that a mountain of meanings can be seen packed into it. The bosom
of the Man of Perfection is not only free from all attachments and
aversions but he has neither ambitions nor desires nor activities nor
efforts. He who recognises the one Self alone everywhere, to him
such a state of mind should be natural.
न  िन ित  न  च   ौित  न    ित  न  कु  ित।
न  ददाित  न  गृ ाित  मु ः  सव    नीरसः॥१३॥
na nindati na ca stauti na hṛṣyati na kupyati,
na dadāti na gṛhṇāti muktaḥ sarvatra nīrasaḥ. (13)
न – not; िन ित – abuses; न – not; च – and;  ौित – praises; न – not;
  ित – rejoices; न – not; कु  ित – is angry; न – not; ददाित – gives; न
– not; गृ ाित – receives; मु ः  – the liberated one; सव   – in all
objects; नीरसः  – free from enjoyment
13. The liberated one neither abuses nor praises. He neither rejoices
nor is he angry. He neither gives nor receives. He is free from
enjoyment in all objects.
Feeling sure that he has not succeeded in painting a liberated man’s
mental attitude towards his world around, Aṣṭāvakra is making yet
another futile attempt at describing the unearthly beauty, balance
and brilliancy of the Man of Perfection. He has no vāsanās,
therefore, no attachments and naturally, there is no sense enjoyment
left in his bosom, even when he is contacting the sense objects.
Such a man, Liberated in life (Jīvanmuktaḥ) is identified here with
the supreme Self which is never involved in the activities of the body
and the mind.
The intellect ‘abuses and praises’. The mind ‘rejoices and feels
angry’. The body ‘receives and gives’. None of these activities are
his. As the Self, in his divine presence, his equipments function and
in them the wise man is not in the least involved nor is he
responsible for his own spontaneous actions. The equipments gather
their vitality and awareness from the Self in all of us; they act all by
themselves according to their vāsanās; while in the Master there are
no vāsanās and, therefore, he is not at all affected by the physical
activities that are going on around him. These are mere illusions,
apparent actions, which can produce no results, cause no reactions
in him.
सानुरागां    यं     ा  मृ  ुं  वा  समुप  थतम्।
अिव लमनाः    थो  मु   एव  महाशयः॥१४॥
sānurāgāṁ striyaṁ dṛṣṭvā mṛtyuṁ vā samupasthitam,
avihvala-manāḥ svastho mukta eva mahāśayaḥ. (14)
सानुरागाम्  – loving, passionate;   यम्  – a woman;    ा – seeing; मृ  ुम्
– death; वा – or; समुप  थतम्  – near at hand; अिव लमनाः  –
unperturbed in mind;   थः  – self-poised; मु ः  – emancipated; एव –
indeed; महाशयः  – the noble-minded one
14. The noble-minded one is not perturbed and remains self-poised
at the sight of a woman full of passion, as well as of approaching
death. He is, indeed, liberated.
His supreme balance of mind, under all conditions outside, is the
final test to know a liberated person. If the man is not excited by the
presence of a passionate, young, beautiful woman nor is he
perturbed by the threatening approach of imminent death, then the
individual has already transcended the body-mind-intellect
equipment and he is awakened to the infinite Self. Neither the
beloved of the dream, nor the tiger of the dream can ever bring any
mental disturbance in one who has awakened from his dream!
When the great courtesan beautifully dressed in muslin and
pearls, carrying fruits in a plate, at dead of night approached the
temple where Buddha was resting for the day, and knocked at the
door, the Lord of compassion woke up, opened the door and met the
lusty girl who had reached to tempt the young brilliant man in
Buddha. Unperturbed, the man of peace, smilingly approached her,
touched her feet and with head bent in humble reverence, said:
‘Mother, how can your son serve you?’ With tears falling from her
eyes she fell prostrate, apologised and returned to her nearby
residence. In time she became one of the greatest workers in the
Master’s camp.
Here is the example of the serene tranquillity of the mind of the
Liberated in life. For such a mind, death has no ferocity; love no
enchantment. Power has no satisfaction; wealth has no charm for
the true Man of Wisdom.
सुखे  दुः खे  नरे  नाया   स   ु  च  िवप ु  च।
िवशेषो  नैव  धीर   सव    समदिश नः॥१५॥
sukhe duḥkhe nare nāryāṁ sampatsu ca vipatsu ca,
viśeṣo naiva dhīrasya sarvatra sama-darśinaḥ. (15)
सुखे – in happiness; दुः खे – in misery; नरे – in man; नाया म्  – in woman;
स   ु – in fortune; च – and; िवप ु – in misfortune; च – and; िवशेषः  –
difference; न – not; एव – indeed; धीर  – of the wise one; सव   –
everywhere; समदिश नः  – seeing the same
15. The wise one who sees the same everywhere, sees no
difference between happiness and misery, man and woman, fortune
and misfortune.
Under all conditions – happiness and misery, among all beings –
men or women, amidst all conditions of arrangement of things –
fortune and misfortune, the Man of Perfection is ever rooted in his
own Self and he never gets disturbed.
The outer objects, by themselves, cannot disturb an individual
nor can the mind by itself create any restlessness. Only when the
mind comes in contact with the world of objects and reacts, then
alone storms are raised in the bosom. The mind reacts, because of
the vāsanās in the mind. Man of Perfection is one who has emptied
his mind of all its memories of the past vāsanās. The serene, tranquil
mind of the Liberated can no longer react with the world around, it
has become a true instrument to act with.
The wise one is never blind to the source from which his thoughts
arise; the ignorant is never conscious of the source. Even if the
thoughts gurgle out and among themselves weave the enchanting
world of objects, beings and situations, they cannot any longer upset
the man, who is continuously conscious of the source. We can watch
a magician's creations with no perplexity and even wonderment,
because we do not forget that it is magic!
He who is thus continuously well-established in the source, the
Consciousness of the Self, even while he is playing in the world of
plurality, he in his wisdom knows that all these are the play of the
Consciousness Supreme, nothing else.
This verse is to be understood only with reference to the state of
the Self; it should not be dragged to the plane of our consciousness.
In our social and communal living – since we are then recognising
the plurality – the descriptive declarations of the saints and sages
cannot be and should not be practised. If the soldier has the right to
shoot and kill, it is only when he is acting as a soldier under the
command of his officers. He will be doing a crime if he, in his village,
shoots down with his army weapon, his neighbour out of his personal
grudge! Do not quote this verse as your excuse for your base, vulgar
and immoral life in the community!
न  िहंसा  नैव  का   ं  नौ   ं  न  च  दीनता।
ना य   नैव  च   ोभः   ीणसंसरणेनरे॥१६॥
na hiṁsā naiva kāruṇyaṁ nauddhatyaṁ na ca dīnatā,
nāścaryaṁ naiva ca kṣobhaḥ kṣīṇa-saṁsaraṇe nare. (16)
न – not; िहंसा – violence, desire to harm; न – not; एव – indeed;
का  म् – mercy, compassion; न – not; औ  म् – pride; न – not; च –
and; दीनता – humility; न – not; आ य म्  – wonder; न  – not; एव – surely;
च – and;  ोभः  – agitation;  ीणसंसरणे – whose worldly life is
exhausted; नरे – in that man
16. In the man, whose worldly life is exhausted, there is neither
compassion nor violence, neither humility nor pride; neither wonder
nor agitation.
In short, the illumined one in his new vision of the infinite peace in
himself does not react at the levels of his body, mind and intellect, as
others would in their ‘ignorance’ of the higher Reality. Living in the
Self, as the Self, the sage is never involved in his physical,
psychological and intellectual contacts with the world around. His
body-mind equipment may function in the world in its unchaste
impulses, but he, as Consciousness, is only an indifferent witness of
it all. The Liberated in life (Jīvanmukta) is not personally involved in
the activities of his body or mind; there is no ‘he’ and ‘him’! The
illumined one is unique and is ever a law unto himself. He cannot be
compared with anyone, not even with the gods!!
न  मु ो  िवषय े ा  न  वा  िवषयलोलुपः।
असंस मनाः  िन ं   ा ा ा म ुपा ुते॥१७॥
na mukto viṣaya-dveṣṭā na vā viṣaya-lolupaḥ,
asaṁsakta-manāḥ nityaṁ prāptāprāptam-upāśnute. (17)
न – not; मु ः  – the liberated one; िवषय े ा – has aversion for the
objects of the senses; न – not; वा – or; िवषयलोलुपः  – cravings for the
objects of the senses; असंस मनाः  – with a detached mind; िन म् –
 े
ever;  ा   – what is attained; अ ा म्  – what is not attained; उपा ुते –
enjoys
17. The liberated one has neither aversion nor craving for the objects
of the senses. Ever with detached mind, he experiences both what is
attained and what is not attained.
Likes and dislikes, aversion and craving, love and hate – these are
emotions – that can reach the bosom of one, only when one has a
sense of attachment with a particular object or objects around him.
The liberated one has freed himself from all his sense of attachment
and, therefore, he cannot feel any aversion for the world of objects,
nor can he ever hanker after sense satisfactions. With a mind
detached from all direct involvements, he lives through life meeting
with all that comes to him unasked in divine freedom. He neither
enjoys the objects that have come to him nor does he crave for
objects that have not reached him. He meets life directly, head-on,
accepting nothing, avoiding nothing! His tranquillity is never
disturbed.
समाधानासमाधानिहतािहतिवक नाः।
शू िच ो  न  जानाित  कै व िमव  सं  थतः॥१८॥
samādhānāsamādhāna-hitāhita-vikalpanāḥ,
śūnyacitto na jānāti kaivalyamiva saṁsthitaḥ. (18)
समाधान  असमाधान  िहत  अिहत  िवक नाः – the mental alternatives of
contemplation and non-contemplation, good and evil; शू िच ः  – of
empty mind (wise man); न – not; जानाित – knows; कै व म्  – in the
state of Aloneness; इव – as it were; सं  थतः  – abiding
18. The wise man of empty mind does not know the mental
alternatives of contemplation and non-contemplation, of good and
evil. He abides, as it were, in the state of Aloneness.
An ordinary man, as an intelligent being, can never remain without
thoughts, he either thinks or he sleeps. Pure Consciousness
experienced in the dynamic state of ‘thoughtlessness’ is Godhood
and this is not experienced by the average man. The wise man, left
to himself, has no thoughts in him and as such the various mental
alternatives, right and wrong, good and evil, beautiful and ugly, heat
and cold, joy and sorrow, ad infinitum, do not at all affect him. He is
unattached to the world and as such the world cannot in the least
affect him. It is only in the lower, relative plane that man suffers from
his mental agitations. To the Realised, there is no mental disturbance
at all. He has transcended his mind and intellect. He is beyond the
beyond (parāt-paraḥ). He abides in the aloneness of the absolute
one Reality.
िनम मो  िनरह ारो  न  िकि िदित  िनि तः।
अ ग   िलतसवा शः  कु व  िप  करोित  न॥१९॥
nirmamo nirahaṅkāro na kiñciditi niścitaḥ,
antargalita-sarvāśaḥ kurvannapi karoti na. (19)
िनम मः  – devoid of my-ness; िनरह ारः  – devoid of I-ness; न – not;
िकि त्  – anything; इित – this; िनि तः  – knowing with certitude;
अ ग िलतसवा शः – with all desires melted away from within; कु व न्  –
doing; न – not; अिप – though; करोित – does (only appears to do); न –
not
19. Devoid of the feelings of 'I-ness' and 'my-ness', knowing for
certain that nothing is and with all his inner desires melted away, the
wise man does not act, though he may appear to be acting.
The liberated man is one in whom the ego has ended. The ego
functions in two ways –
(a) Ego sense, which is experienced as the ‘I-ness’, and
(b) The ego feeling experienced as ‘my-ness’.
When these two are ended, the ego is lifted. The very source of
ego is the surge of desires. In the Man of Perfection, the ego is
ended along with its roots and so Aṣṭāvakra clarifies, ‘With all his
inner desires melted away’.
Egoless activities are no more actions. Impulse for action is
desire. The actor is the ego. When there is no actor, nor the
impulses of desire, there are only movements of the equipment and
not ‘action’. They can produce no result to the Man of Liberation,
there is no ego to claim it. An equipment in which this ego has
ended, is the empty reed through which the Lord sings His Song
Divine for the benefit of mankind and for the welfare of the world. No
more does the individual mind act through him; the total mind
expresses through him as Its chosen Equipment Divine. In this
sense, one liberated in life is to be considered as God in action.
मनः   काशसंमोह  जा िवविज तः।
दशां  कामिप  सं ा ो  भवे िलतमानसः॥२०॥
manaḥ prakāśa-saṁmoha-svapna-jāḍya-vivarjitaḥ,
daśāṁ kāmapi saṁprāpto bhaved-galita-mānasaḥ. (20)
मनः काशसंमोह  जा िवविज तः  – the functions of his mind have
ceased to operate and who is free from delusion, dreaming and
dullness; ( ानी – the sage); दशाम्  – condition; काम्अिप –
indescribable; सं ा ः  भवेत्  – attains; गिलतमानसः  – whose mind has
melted away
20. An indescribable state is attained by the sage whose mind has
melted away, whose functions having ceased to operate and who is
free from delusion, dreaming and dullness.
After nineteen verses of inspired attempt in painting the picture of the
Man of Perfection, Aṣṭāvakra feels, in the last verse here, that he
has made only a fool of himself! He confesses that this state of
Selfhood cannot be described in words.
All these twenty verses are, as it were, so many sign- posts
suggesting to the contemplative intellect, a certain direction towards
which it may turn its vision. Each student will comprehend this state
of Perfection to the extent he has prepared his own equipment for
the great understanding.
In the liberated one, his mind is completely dissolved. Not even
‘sattva’ expresses through it; ‘rajas’ that creates delusion and
dreams has departed; ‘tamas’ that veils the intellect from the
perception of Reality has been pulled down.
The inertia (tamas) veils the intellect and then the mind becomes
agitated (rajas) with its projections and imaginations. Pure ‘non-
apprehension’ of the Reality is created by ‘tamas’ and the
‘misapprehensions’ are produced by the ‘rajas’. When these two
factors are controlled through sādhanā, the ‘sattva’ predominates in
the mind and makes it more and more contemplative. In the zenith of
meditation, when even the last traces of ‘rajas’ and ‘tamas’ are
ended, there the pure sāttvika mind transcends itself and merges
with the infinite Consciousness. Māyā is crossed here. Avidyā is
ended. In pure Wisdom revels the wise man.
How can such a being be described by words as he transcends
the entire world of relative experiences, where alone is language
vehemently potent and extremely efficient? At best, language
stammers, pants and becomes silent.
1 viriñcibhavanātpāre tattvānte'pyāharat padam,
prasaratyeva me rūpamadyāpi na nivartate. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-5.34.63
2 hariḥ prahlādanāmā yo matto nānyo hariḥ pṛthak,
iti niścayavānantarvyāpako'haṁ ca sarvataḥ. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-5.31.41
3 nirapekṣaṁ muniṁ śāntaṁ nirvairaṁ samadarśanam,
anuvrajāmyahaṁ nityaṁ pūyeyetyanghrireṇubhiḥ. – Bhāgavata-11.14.16
4 yathā viviktamekānte mano bhavati nirvṛtam,
na tathā śaśibimbeṣu na ca brahmendrasadmasu. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-6.84.20
5 yā niśā sarvabhūtānāṁ tasyāṁ jāgarti saṁyamī,
yasyāṁ jāgrati bhūtāni sā niśā paśyato muneḥ. – Bhagavad-gītā-2-69

Chapter – 18
The Goal
Introduction
Even the most potential man of achievement must have been a
helpless bundle of living limbs when he was in his mother's womb.
Limited by the shells of the mind and intellect, the infinitely divine
and omnipotent Reality lives today as a helpless ego chained to our
bosom! To release this individuality out of its entanglements is to
hatch it out of its shell of time and space. It thereafter lives in the
realisation of its true infinite nature. This is the destination of all
evolutions; the goal to be reached.
This spiritual goal cannot be directly explained as it lies beyond
the embrace of words. It transcends the intellect. This goal is not
comprehended by our understanding but it can be apprehended as
our essential Being. Any discourse upon the nature of this Reality
can only be a futile attempt on the part of the Teacher, because the
student will never be able to intellectually apprehend That which lies
beyond the compass of his intellect's understanding.
And yet, the intellectual students, naturally demand an
explanation, a discourse, an exhaustive description, a
comprehensive definition, a lucid exposition of the goal, because the
intellectual man cannot subscribe himself enthusiastically to a path
of life, without knowing its declared purpose, its final goal and its true
end.
The scriptural Masters, thus compelled to explain the
inexplicable, to describe the indescribable or to define the
indefinable, had to adopt various techniques in suggesting the
understanding into the contemplative mind of their students. One of
the most effective methods adopted, generally, by almost all Masters
in India, in bringing to our mind the unique perfections of the
supreme Self, is by helping us to closely observe the physical
behaviour and the mental attitude of a Liberated in life.
A sage in action is the infinite Reality visibly demonstrated. The
authors of the scriptures, as they explain the behaviour of a Man of
Perfection, they add copious foot- notes to explain to us how and
why the sage discovers so much of peace and happiness even
amidst adverse circumstances, miserable conditions and even under
grave provocations.
This technique of pointing, through a sage in action the unearthly
beauties of perfection attained by him, is the modus operandi that is
followed in this brilliant eighteenth chapter of the Aṣṭāvakra Saṁhitā.
As in the Bhagavad-gītā, here also we find this eighteenth chapter
serves as a quick summary of all that has been so far said and
serves as a thunderous peroration, richly paving the way to its final
conclusions.
The supreme goal of Selfhood given out here in this chapter is
neither discursive, nor descriptive; all along, in every verse, even at
his best, it is demonstrative, inasmuch as the words of Aṣṭāvakra,
while clearly painting the sage in action, point to a divine Reality in
and through the Liberated in life. In short, these verses are packed
with secret instructions to all students of deep meditation upon how
they can proceed ahead blasting the fortress of ‘ignorance’ and
bursting into the blissful Infinitude.
A wealth of thoughts is scattered all along the chapter, rich in
their diction of Upaniṣads and deep philosophical import. Into this
enchanting edifice of majesty and grandeur, the poetic pen of
Aṣṭāvakra adds an unforgettable charm and beauty with his originally
coined shining terms and blazing phrases. As they light up our path
they spread a constant sweetness with their captivating fragrance of
deep mystic truths. The Hindu Vaidika assertions – ‘This Self is
Brahman’ (ayam atmā brahma); ‘I am Brahman’ (aham brahma
asmi); ‘This universe of multiplicity is all nothing but the Self’
(ātmaiva jagat sarvam) – are all echoing and re-echoing in the
chambers of these hundred verses. Original phrases – as
‘niṣprapañca’ (beyond relativity); ‘nīrasa’ (flavourless); ‘nis-svabhāva’
(without natural attributes); ‘nirāyāsa’ (effortless) and so on – enrich
and enlighten. All together this chapter serves as sacred sanctum, a
cherished chapel consecrated to the self-effulgent universal
Consciousness, the one without a second! In it the universe is but a
mere hallucination of the restless mind!!
The magic of this chapter smuggles us into the bewitching realm
of the infinite Bliss. No student of contemplative mind can safely
stand away from the exotic silence of Aṣṭāvakra's Experience Divine.
The chapter, with its conclusions, cascades into the immutable and
bewildering statements of deliberate and intentional contradictions
and of pleasant and purposeful paradoxes! To ride with them is to
end our ego and dash into the lap of Experience Supreme!
The theme of this chapter is manifestly the life and experience of
a Man of Wisdom, who is fully established in the Self. Its inescapable
witchcraft is not as such in the words employed, but, it lurks
somewhere between its words and between its lines. The
enchantment of these verses can give us a free ride to the spiritual
goal, if we are accredited pilgrims on the path of deep meditation.
By the end of this chapter even those students who have failed to
arrive at the goal are left, for all times to come, with a sense of
devotion and reverence towards all sages, who are living
spontaneous samādhi in life, enjoying the infinite Bliss, which is the
nature of the Self (pūrṇa svarasa vigraha).
अ ाव   उवाच
य   बोधोदये  तावत्    व वित   मः ।
त  ै  सुखैक पाय  नमः  शा ाय  तेजसे॥१॥
aṣṭāvakra uvāca
yasya bodhodaye tāvat svapnavad-bhavati bhramaḥ,
tasmai sukhaika-rūpāya namaḥ śāntāya tejase. (1)
य   – of which; बोध  उदये – at the dawn of Knowledge; तावत्  – all;
  वत्  – like a dream (unreal); भवित – becomes;  मः  – delusion; त  ै
– to That; सुखैक पाय – which is embodiment of Bliss; नमः  –
salutations; शा ाय – serene; तेजसे – effulgence
Aṣṭāvakra said:
1. Salutations to That, which is the embodiment of Bliss, serenity,
effulgence, with the dawn of whose knowledge, all delusions become
unreal as a dream.
A mere intellectual study or reflection, by itself can never lead the
student on to the path of real meditation. Meditation is an all out
application of a total integrated personality in the search of Truth.
The external marks of religiosity are merely physical; deep devotion
and reverence are emotional and a clear understanding of the nature
of the goal and the path pursued are intellectual aspects of the
spiritual life. All the three are unavoidable for success in meditation,
inasmuch as we have to bring therein our entire personality. Even
when Aṣṭāvakra is discussing the highest absolute view-point of the
non-dual Brahman, he exemplifies the need for integration in a
student of meditation by dramatically adding this opening stanza
here, with which he so loudly salutes and so visibly prostrates to the
effulgent embodiment of Bliss, the Self within.
The seat of Consciousness, is indicated here as the substratum
for all the imaginary world of the body, mind and intellect and their
experiences. When the substratum (adhiṣṭhāna) is realised, the
superimposition (adhyāsa) is instantaneously removed. On seeing
the rope, the snake vision is lost; on recognising the post, the
fantasy of the ghost is gone. On realising the Self, the
misconceptions of the ego end immediately. To recognise the
apparent illusion to be the real is called ‘superimposition’ (adhyāsa).
Śaṅkara defines superimposition as: ‘The illusion of seeing no
distinction between the Real and the false is superimposition.’1
This reminds us of an equally attractive prostration to ‘the power
of discrimination’ (viveka) offered in Yoga-vāsiṣṭha: ‘O to thee,
viveka! my salutations. Destroying the powerful and strong enemy of
my mind who confused me with the delusions ‘I am this’, ‘This has
come’, ‘This is mine’ and so on and has reached me to enjoy the
unbroken serenity of my bosom. Viveka, I salute thee.’2
अज िय ाऽ खलानथा न्  भोगाना ोित  पु लान्।
न  िह  सव प र ागम रेण  सुखी  भवेत्॥२॥
arjayitvā-'khilān-arthān bhogān-āpnoti puṣkalān,
na hi sarvaparityāgam-antareṇa sukhī bhavet. (2)
अज िय ा – acquiring; अ खलान् – all; अथा न् – worldly objects; भोगान् –
enjoyments; आ ोित – attains; पु लान् – abundant; न – not; िह –
surely; सव प र ागम्  अ रेण – without the renunciation of all; सुखी –
happy; भवेत् – becomes
2. One gets plenty of enjoyments by acquiring the manifold objects
of the senses. Surely one cannot be happy without renouncing them
all.
On the first reading it would sound as a contradiction, as the former
part of the statement positively declares that there is joy in the sense
objects; but it says, in its concluding part, that happiness cannot be
without renunciation of them all. Here the confusion is generated in
our minds only because we are not alert enough to distinguish
between ‘enjoyment’ and ‘happiness’. Happiness is the goal sought
by every human mind and the means employed by everyone is the
enjoyment of the sense objects. Generally man misunderstands
herein the means that is sense enjoyments, to be the goal that is
‘happiness’.
Nobody denies that there are, but limited and evanescent
glimmers of enjoyments when the sense organs come in contact with
the sense objects. But what man demands is a total satisfaction
meaning happiness and not sense gratification, enjoyments. In the
renunciation of all sense pursuits lies the path to permanent and
satisfying happiness. Desires create mental agitation and a mind
agitated is a mind in sorrow. By renouncing the desires, the thoughts
subside and a quiet mind is itself the glow of happiness. Thus, lesser
the desires, lesser the agitations and more the joy. Least desires,
least agitations and maximum joy. Therefore, ‘no desires’ is a state
of thoughtlessness, which is the state of infinite Bliss, the Self.
In the absence of all objects, in the deep sleep state of
consciousness, there is joy for all, everywhere. In fact, at the
moment of enjoyment there is no presence of the object, there is
only the experience of the Bliss, which is the very nature of the Self.
कत  द ुः खमात   ालाद ा रा नः ।
कु तः   शमपीयूषधारासारमृते  सुखम्॥३॥
kartavya-duḥkha-mārtaṇḍa-jvālā-dagdhāntarātmanaḥ,
kutaḥ praśama-pīyūṣa-dhārā-sāramṛte sukham. (3)
कत  द ुः खमात   ालाद अ रा नः  – of one whose inner equipment
has been scorched by the heat of sun of sorrow of his deeds; कु तः  –
 ी े
where (is);  शमपीयूषधारासारमृते – except in the continuous shower of
the ambrosia of desirelessness; सुखम्  – happiness
3. One whose inner equipment has been scorched by the heat of the
sun of sorrow arising from his deeds, where can he enjoy happiness,
except in the continuous ambrosial shower of desirelessness?
A mind that has been stormed by the passionate surge of the
continuous lashing waves of desires and their consequent frothing,
noisy deeds can calm itself only when desireless-ness comes to play
therein.
The verse is a typical example of the pictorial style in Sanskrit
literature, especially employed in poetry. Here is an attempt of the
poet to communicate philosophical truth in terms of our physical
experiences. In the scorching heat of the summer, except a heavy
cool shower, nothing else can cool us into comfort. The desire ridden
bosom is ever in agitation whipping the man into endless
endeavours. With the dawn of right knowledge, that the finite objects
of the world, with their limited joys, cannot give what our heart is
yearning for, will come the spirit of retirement and relinquishment.
Except in this state of intelligent desirelessness, a storming
passionate mind cannot calm itself down. So long as this
discriminating knowledge has not dawned in an individual bosom, it
has to suffer its endless restlessness. Tranquillity of the mind and
inner peace are the rewards of wisdom and right understanding.
भवोऽयं  भावनामा ो  न  िकि त्  परमाथ तः।
ना भावः   भावानां  भावाभाविवभािवनाम्॥४॥
bhavo'yaṁ bhāvanā-mātro na kiñcit paramārthataḥ,
nāstyabhāvaḥ svabhāvānāṁ bhāvābhāva-vibhāvinām. (4)
भवः  – universe; अयम्  – this; भावना  मा ः  – mere mode of thinking; न –
not; िकि त्  – anything; परमाथ तः  – in reality; न – not; अ   – is; अभावः
 ि ि
– non-existent;  भावानाम्  – the inherent nature; भावअभाविवभािवनाम्  –
in the existent (Self) and the non-existent (universe)
4. This universe is but a mode of thinking. In reality it is nothing. The
inherent nature of the existent (Self) and of the non-existent
(universe) are never lost.
Very often statements in Aṣṭāvakra-gītā are rendered attractive not
only because of their pithy style, but because of their eloquent and
ringing diction. Here is a typical example. This universe is but a
mode of thinking (bhavo-yam bhāvanā-mātraḥ). This has become a
famous saying in the mouths of all scholars of Vedānta. On
awakening to the Reality, when the mind is hushed up from its
thoughts, the magic of the names and forms rolls away and the
student realises ‘In reality it is nothing’ (na kiñcit paramārthataḥ). The
Sage Aṣṭāvakra declares here the great philosophical truth that the
existent Self and the non-existent universe both can never lose their
individual nature.
The Self is eternal, permanent, changeless and infinite; the
universe is non-eternal, impermanent, ever-changing and finite.
Neither of them can change their essential nature. In short, the Self
alone is Real and It will ever remain Real. The world of plurality is
ever unreal and never can it be real; the Self is existent. The world is
non-existent. They cannot change their nature.
न  दू रं  न  च  स ोचा  म ेवा नः  पदम्।
िनिव क  ं  िनरायासं  िनिव कारं  िनर नम्॥५॥
na dūraṁ na ca saṅkocāllabdham-evātmanaḥ padam,
nirvikalpaṁ nirāyāsaṁ nirvikāraṁ nirañjanam. (5)
न – not; दू रम् – far; न – not; च – and; स ोचात् – limited; ल म् – ever
attained; एव – indeed; आ नः  पदम्  – the nature of the Self; िनिव क म्
ि ि ि   ि
– absolute; िनरायासम् – effortless; िनिव कारम् – immutable; िनर नम्  –
stainless
5. The Self which is absolute, effortless, immutable and stainless is
not far away, inaccessible nor is It limited, unattainable. It is indeed
ever attained.
The supreme Consciousness in its absolute nature is stainless,
meaning, ‘It is beyond all passions and desires, that is vāsanās’.
‘Perceptions’ of the body, ‘emotions’ of the mind, ‘thoughts’ of the
intellect are all exertions and, therefore, to act with these equipments
is always an effort. The Ᾱtman, the Reality is explained here as
‘effortless’ (nirāyāsam), inasmuch as It is experienced when all
equipments are transcended, where the ego surrenders completely
and disappears into the vision of the Reality. This great state is our
own real nature and, therefore, It is ‘not far away’ from us; It is not
inaccessible to anyone.
The limited alone is attainable with our equipments. The Self is
infinite and, therefore, unlimited; naturally It is ‘unattainable’. It is the
very being in us, the very Existence-Knowledge in us; as such never
is a time when we are away from It. ‘It is indeed ever attained.’ In our
delusion we recognise not the constant presence of this divine Self.
Roars the ṛṣi in Muṇḍakopaniṣad: ‘Further than the farthest, It is
here within the body. The sages realise It verily in this life as fixed in
the heart.’3
 ामोहमा िवरतौ    पादानमा तः।
वीतशोका  िवराज े  िनरावरण  यः॥६॥
vyāmoha-mātra-viratau svarūp-ādāna-mātrataḥ,
vītaśokā virājante nirāvaraṇa-dṛṣṭayaḥ. (6)
 ो ि ौ
 ामोह  मा   िवरतौ – as soon as illusion ceases;   प  आदान - मा तः  –
the Self alone is realised; वीतशोकाः – free from misery; िवराज े –
(they) shine; िनरावरण    यः  – whose understanding (vision) is fully
unveiled
6. Those whose understanding (vision) is fully unveiled, they shine
free from misery. As soon as their illusion ceases, the Self is
realised.
The Self, which is the essential nature of the seeker, is not realised
by him only because of his ego and its illusion in him. As an ego, he
is preoccupied with his own miseries and his understanding is
clouded by ‘tamas’ and shattered by ‘rajas’. When these two moods
of the mind are sublimated, contemplativeness increases in mind
and the contemplative mind, during moments of its meditation cannot
avoid discovering its own illusion and eternal Reality behind them all.
Such perfect students shine in inner glory of their directly
experienced spiritual essence.
सम ं  क नामा मा ा  मु ः  सनातनः।
इित  िव ाय  धीरो  िह  िकम  ित  बालवत्॥७॥
samastaṁ kalpanā-mātram-ātmā muktaḥ sanātanaḥ,
iti vijñāya dhīro hi kim-abhyasyati bālavat. (7)
सम म् – all that exists; क ना  मा म्  – mere imagination; आ ा – Self;
मु ः  – free; सनातनः  – eternal; इित – thus; िव ाय – knowing; धीरः  – the
wise man; िह – indeed; िकम् – does he; अ  ित  – acts; बालवत्  – like
a child
7. All that exists is mere imagination. The Self is free and eternal,
knowing thus, does the wise one act like a child?
On awakening from a dream, the waker realises that the dream that
he was seeing was mere imagination and that the waker is the
Reality. One who has awakened from the ego’s usual plane of
consciousness and its endless sorrows, he realises that the worlds
of experiences lived at the body, mind and the intellect levels are all
imaginations of a mind fluttering in its restlessness. A wise man
experiences the infinite blissful Self. One who has thus awakened to
the higher plane of Consciousness, can he ever act like a child in the
world?
The example 'like a child' employed here, opens up many
possible explanations. Commentators differ in their opinions on what
exactly is suggested by Aṣṭāvakra here. Such a wise man certainly
will not act in the world thereafter (1) irresponsibly, (2) foolishly, (3)
mischievously, (4) playfully – as a child! A child in his ignorance may
invite harm unto itself, and can innocently cause disastrous
calamities to others. A wise man, as long as he lives in this world,
will never initiate activities which would bring, even unconsciously,
sorrows to individuals or to the community. He is so well-established
in the harmony of the universal Self that all his actions must bring
only blessings to others; even activities which look apparently
ridiculous or immoral, can but bring only, in the end, blessings to the
community! They can do no wrong, never!!
आ ा     ेित  िनि    भावाभावौ  च  क  तौ।
िन ामः  िकं  िवजानाित  िकं   ूते  च  करोित  िकम्॥८॥
ātmā brahmeti niścitya bhāvābhāvau ca kalpitau,
niṣkāmaḥ kiṁ vijānāti kiṁ brūte ca karoti kim. (8)
आ ा – Self;     – Brahman; इित – thus; िनि   – having known with
certitude; भाव - अभावौ – existence and non-existence; च – and; क  तौ
– imagined; िन ामः  – desireless; िकम्  – what; िवजानाित – knows; िकम्
– what;  ूते – says; च – and; करोित – does; िकम्  – what
8. Having known with certitude that the Self is Brahman, and the
existence and non-existence are mere imaginations, what can one,
who is desireless, know, say or do?
Here the term ‘existence and non-existence’ is used as an idiom to
indicate the entire world of multiplicity which is recognised in terms of
the pairs of opposites, such as joy and sorrow, heat and cold, good
and bad, right and wrong and so on. All of them are at once
comprehended by this suggestive term. This is a very popular and
much used philosophical idiom in Vedānta.
The pairs of opposites are expressions of the mind and intellect
and naturally, they are illusions projected by the restless mind upon
the substratum, the peaceful Self. One who has awakened to the
Self, has ended all his illusions – one having seen the post, can he
get any longer disturbed by the ghost visions?
For such an individual, who has transcended the mind and,
therefore, has reached a state of perfect desireless-ness, there can
neither be an ego, nor any actions. He has transcended all the three
equipments of body, mind and intellect and naturally, the Teacher
asks, ‘What can one, who is desireless, know, say or do?’ Here
‘knowing’ is the function of the intellect, ‘saying’ represents all
activities at the body level and ‘doing’ all the functions of the mind. In
short, there will be no sense of ‘doership’ or ‘enjoyership’ in that
perfected Master.
An ancient sage has sung: ‘The liberated is ever the Self beyond
the mind and so not bound by anything; bondage and Liberation are
conditions that depend upon the mind. One whose mind has become
hushed up, his entire sense of individuality has ended.’4
अयं  सोऽहमयं  नाहिमित   ीणा  िवक नाः।
सव मा ेित  िनि    तू ी  ूत   योिगनः॥९॥
ayaṁ so'ham-ayaṁ nāham-iti kṣīṇā vikalpanāḥ,
sarvam-ātmeti niścitya tūṣṇīm-bhūtasya yoginaḥ. (9)
 ि
अयम्  सः  – this is That; अहम्  – I; अयम्  – this; न – not; अहम्  – I; इित –
thus;  ीणाः  – extinguished; िवक नाः  – thoughts; सव म्  – everything;
आ ा  – Self; इित  – thus; िनि   – knowing with certitude; तू ी ं  भूत   –
become quiet; योिगनः  – of the yogin
9. Such thoughts as ‘this is That,’ ‘I am That,’ and ‘I am not this’ are
extinguished for the yogin who has become quiet, knowing with
certitude that everything is Self only.
On realising the one infinite Self as all-pervading and immutable,
every kind of mental concept must completely cease. That ‘I am the
body, mind and intellect’, or that ‘I am not the body, mind and the
intellect’, or the idea that ‘I am the Self’ – all these are conceptual
and are, therefore, mere mental disturbances and at their best only
serious intellectual approximations. To become the Self and to live in
the state of the Self, is to end all such artificial repetitions and
conceptual approximations. The Liberated in life directly experiences
the Self immutable.
In one who has realised, all such thought agitations are
extinguished, and he lives continuously in the awareness that he is
the Self and, therefore, he is the all.
न  िव ेपो  न  चैका ं  नाितबोधो  न  मूढता।
न  सुखं  न  च  वा  दुः खमुपशा    योिगनः॥१०॥
na vikṣepo na caikāgryaṁ nātibodho na mūḍhatā,
na sukhaṁ na ca vā duḥkham-upaśāntasya yoginaḥ. (10)
न – not; िव ेपः  – distractions (agitations); न – not; च – and; एका म्  –
concentration; न – not; अितबोधः  – increase of knowledge; न – not;
मूढता – ignorance; न – not; सुखम् – pleasure; न – not; च – and; वा – or;
दुः खम्  – pain; उपशा   – who has become serene; योिगनः  – of yogin
10. The yogin who has attained serenity has no more distractions, no
concentration, no increase in knowledge, no ignorance. He has
neither pleasure nor pain.
The Liberated in life has transcended his mind-intellect equipment
and, therefore, in his serenity there is no fluctuation of knowledge, or
feeling, that might come to disturb him ever. ‘Distractions’ are the
experiences of agitations in the mind. ‘Concentration’ is practised as
a discipline of the intellect over the distracted and wild mind.
Brilliancy of knowledge or dullness or ignorance are all bright and
dull conditions of the intellect. Pleasure and pain are the experiences
in the mind.
All these enumerated list of factors are to show that there is no
stormy state of restlessness in the bosom of a Man of Perfection.
Nothing disturbs his infinite serenity. He experiences what Christ
describes as, ‘The Peace, that passeth all understanding’.
 ारा  े  भै व ृ ौ  च  लाभालाभे  जने  वने।
िनिव क  भाव   न  िवशेषोऽ    योिगनः॥११॥
svārājye bhaikṣya-vṛttau ca lābhālābhe jane vane,
nirvikalpa-svabhāvasya na viśeṣo'sti yoginaḥ. (11)
 ारा  े – in the dominion of heaven; भै व ृ ौ – in beggary; च – and;
लाभअलाभे – in gain and loss; जने – in society; वने – in forest;
िनिव क  भाव   – whose nature is without desire agitations; न – not;
िवशेषः – difference; अ   – is, योिगनः – of the yogin
11. Be he in heaven or be he in beggary, be he in gain or loss, in
company of society or lonely in forest, there is no difference to the
yogin, who is free from desire agitations.
The previous verse expounded the continuous state of tranquillity of
the inner equipments of the Liberated in life. It is very well-known
that a wise man also will have to certainly live in the very same world
of disturbances in which we live. We know that there are thousands
of situations, where the outer world can blast our peace within and
storm our bosom with hordes of worldly agitations. Here, in this
verse, Aṣṭāvakra clearly declares that the outer world of happenings,
the circumstances and conditions around a Man of Realisation will
not affect him at all, at any time.
Thus, let him be placed in a heavenly arrangement of
circumstances to give extreme happiness and pleasure or let him be
placed in the midst of poverty and privations forcing him to live a life
of beggary, his inward peace and joy is not affected in the least! To
him gain and loss are insignificant fluctuations in the outer world. He
gains nothing by the worldly gains nor can his spiritual happiness be
lost by the loss of worldly objects!
Be he in a pleasant company in a city or be he lonely in a forest,
it is the same to him, he is ever in the Infinite. The Liberated, who
has conquered his desire-agitations, is no more an ego conditioned
by its mind and so he is invulnerable to the persecutions of the world
around him.
He lives with his head and heart lost in the transcendental,
though his feet are upon the earth where we crawl about in our
misery and self-created illusions of our daily sorrows!!
   धम ः     च  वा  कामः     चाथ ः     िववेकता।
इदं  कृ तिमदं  नेित     ैमु     योिगनः॥१२॥
kva dharmaḥ kva ca vā kāmaḥ kva cārthaḥ kva vivekatā,
idaṁ kṛtam-idaṁ neti dvandvair-muktasya yoginaḥ. (12)
   – where; धम ः  – righteousness;    – where; च – and; वा – or; कामः –
sense of enjoyment;    – where; च – and; अथ ः  – wealth;    – where;
िववेकता – conscience; इदम्  – this; कृ तम्  – done; इदम्  – this; न – not;
 ि ै ोि
इित – thus;    ैः  – from pairs of opposites; मु    – free; योिगनः  – of
the yogin
12. For a yogin, who has transcended such dual notions as ‘this is to
be done’ and ‘this is not to be done’ where is righteousness
(dharma)? Where is sense enjoyment (kāma)? Where is worldly
prosperity (artha) and where is conscience (vivekatā)?
In the relative fields of consciousness alone can the ego function and
all pairs of opposites are the agitations of the ego. The idea that
some things are ‘to be done’ and some are ‘not to be done’ is based
upon the delusion of seeking one’s happiness in the world of objects
and their arrangements. One, in whom the ego has ended, can no
longer have in him the compulsions of the pairs of opposites. To
such an individual, who has already reached the supreme goal, he
has no more any use for the various wayside stations which are the
‘goals of life’ (puruṣārthas), as conceived by the Hindu way of living
– dharma, artha and kāma. He is not moving towards Mokṣa, he has
reached Liberation in life.
Man is often tempted to act at the body and mind levels
compromising his own intellectual convictions and ideals. The
passing fascination for some immediate gain forces the mind and the
body to revolt against the restraint of the intellect and rush out to
embrace these fanciful sense objects. When the mind’s passion is
satisfied, the intellect regains its command and the mind feels a
deep regret at the honest criticisms of the intellect! These shooting
pangs of regrets of the mind for having disobeyed the nobler
discriminations of the intellect, are popularly called as the
‘conscience pricks’.
This is the lot of all educated, cultured people; frequently we are
compelled to compromise with our own right understanding. To a
Man of Perfection there is no such self-criticism that can rise in his
intellect, because he has transcended all the equipments! He has no
regrets in life, even for ‘what he has done’, or regarding ‘what he has
not yet done.’ The term ‘vivekatā’ used here for ‘conscience’ is a
very novel term used with its own significant import.
कृ   ं  िकमिप  नैवा    न  कािप   िद  र ना।
यथा  जीवनमेवेह  जीव ु    योिगनः॥१३॥
kṛtyaṁ kimapi naivāsti na kāpi hṛdi rañjanā,
yathā jīvanam-eveha jīvanmuktasya yoginaḥ. (13)
कृ  म् – duty; िकम्  अिप – any; न – not; एव – surely; अ   – is; न – not;
कािप – any;  िद – at heart; र ना – attachment; यथाजीवनम्  – pertaining
to present life; एव – only (is); इह – in this world; जीवन् - मु    –
Liberated in life; योिगनः  – of the yogin
13. The yogin, who is Liberated in life, has neither any duty nor any
attachment at heart. His actions merely follow the lot of his life.
On awakening to the higher plane, the Self, the Man of Perfection
has transcended his ego. Not only that he has no more ego sense as
‘I’ but also has no more ego feeling as ‘my’. This is the very reason
why he has neither desires – no ‘I’ to entertain them; nor
attachments – no sense of possession ‘my’ to feel attachments for.
Generally, when a man desires, then he will have attachments to his
desired objects. The Liberated in life has neither of them.
In the previous verse the Man of Realisation is described as
remaining in his highest state of experience in samādhi, while here in
this verse Aṣṭāvakra is describing the Liberated in life as seen by
others, functioning in society. We see a sage acting in life so long as
his body lives. The sage takes up any work that turns up and lives
any kind of life that is available for him.
He is unique, inasmuch as an ordinary man is compelled to
choose a particular kind of work and to insist upon a definite type of
life that he wants to live. A worldly man insists upon living his own
chosen profession. To a Man of Perfection there is no choosing; he
never plans or demands; he just lives.
He seems to work in any field that comes to him unasked; he
lives upon that whatever comes to him by chance! Under all
conditions and circumstances, in all companies, everywhere, at all
times, he is supremely serene and blissful in his greater identification
with the infinite Reality. He acts as forced by the prārabdha –
resultant of the past actions of his body!!
The body was initiated as a resultant of the past deeds. It has
arrived in this world to experience not only the rewards of his past
noble life but also pay for the bad deeds of the past, in terms of
exhausting strifes, sorrowful circumstances, miserable diseases, and
so on. But a Liberated in life, with equal enthusiasm plunges joyously
into all such actions that reach him and his body vigorously
functions, wherein he is no ‘doer’, but only an indifferent ‘observer’, a
patient ‘witness’. Hence, the deeds of a sage are termed here as
‘yathā jīvanam’.
Even this descriptive explanation is merely to satisfy our ignorant
viewpoint wherein we see the body of the sage functioning in our
plane of consciousness. The Man of Realisation is ever in the Self.
He has become the Self. In him all activities take place. He himself is
ever an observer of his own body functioning through its varied
experiences of joys and sorrows! He is never involved in them.
   मोहः     च  वा  िव ं     त ानं     मु ता।
सव स  सीमायां  िव ा    महा नः॥१४॥
kva mohaḥ kva ca vā viśvaṁ kva taddhānaṁ kva muktatā,
sarva-saṅkalpa-sīmāyāṁ viśrāntasya mahātmanaḥ. (14)
   – where; मोहः  – delusion;    – where; च – and; वा – or; िव म् –
universe;    – where; (तत् - हानम्  ) तद् - धानम् – its renunciation;    –
   ी
where; मु ता  – Liberation; सव स  सीमायाम् – beyond the borders of
the world of desire agitations; िव ा    – resting; महा नः  – of the
noble-minded one
14. Where is delusion? Where is the universe? Where is its
renunciation? Or, where is the Liberation itself for the noble-minded
one, who rests beyond the world of desire agitations?
The 'ignorance' of the Self procreates the delusion of the world of
multiplicity. To a sage who has awakened himself to the Self, there is
no more any delusion nor does he recognise any world of plurality
other than the immutable Self, the one without a second. Since he is
not recognising the world of objects, what is there for him to
renounce? Indeed, he rests in the Self, beyond the world of all
passions and cravings and their endless agitations. Calm and
serene, he lives the bliss of the peaceful Self.
येन  िव िमदं    ं  स  ना ीित  करोतु  वै।
िनवा सनः  िकं  कु  ते  प  िप  न  प ित॥१५॥
yena viśvam-idaṁ dṛṣṭaṁ sa nāstīti karotu vai,
nirvāsanaḥ kiṁ kurute paśyannapi na paśyati. (15)
येन – by whom; िव म्  – universe; इदम् – this;   म् – is seen; सः – he;
न – not; अ   – is; इित – thus; करोतु – may try to obliterate it; वै –
indeed; िनवा सनः  – one who is desireless; िकम् – what; कु  ते – has to
do; प न ्  – seeing; अिप – though; न – not; प ित – beholds
15. He, who sees the universe, may try to obliterate it! What has the
desireless to do? He beholds it not, even though he sees!!
It is the individualised ego that identifies with the body-mind-intellect
equipment and recognises through it the world of objects emotions
and thoughts. When there is a subject to experience, there is also a
world of objects to be experienced, complete with its joys and
sorrows. We are now living at the level of the ego and as such we
see only our projected world of names and forms. In our present
state of consciousness, we have to accept what we perceive and
experience, as the only reality. We have no concept of the subtler
realm of the infinite Self. To the deluded the ghost alone is real; there
is no post at all! And the deluded man must try to negate the ghost in
his attempt to see the post. One who beholds the post must
necessarily fail to see the ghost; one who beholds the Self, fails to
see the world.
The desireless one has no ego in him, which is the ‘observer’ in
the bosom. Where the ego has ended, the Self is realised.
Awakened to the perception of the Self, the sage perceives nothing
but the Self everywhere.
‘Seeing’ is the function of the fleshy eyes. The Man of Perfection
also sees through his eyes the world of objects; yet, he cannot
behold our world which is to us of infinite enjoyments, powerful
fascinations, with its tragic sorcery to bring storms of agitations and
sorrows into our bosom, which destroy us completely in exertion,
fatigue and disappointment. The awakened Master, though he sees
this world with his eyes, fails to behold in it anything unholy and
threatening. He sees nothing but the peaceful Self, the blissful
Reality, spread everywhere within and without, in which the world of
names and forms, of joys and sorrows, have no existence at all. The
dream has ended; he has awakened.
We see through our ignorance and understand the world as
substantial and real. The sage also sees the same world, but
through his understanding recognises it as insubstantial and unreal.
He sees the world as mere ‘castles in the sky’, as the ‘mirage water’,
as the ‘double moon’, as the entertaining ‘creations of a magician’.
The Man of Realisation lives in our world, but his experience of the
Self helps him to evaluate life correctly.
 े ो ेि ि े
येन    ं  परं      सोऽहं     ेित  िच येत्।
िकं  िच यित  िनि  ो  ि तीयं  यो  न  प ित॥१६॥
yena dṛṣṭaṁ paraṁ brahma so'haṁ brahmeti cintayet,
kiṁ cintayati niścinto dvitīyaṁ yo na paśyati. (16)
येन – by whom;   म् – is seen; परम् – supreme;     – Brahman; सः  –
he; अहं      – I am Brahman; इित – thus; िच येत्  – meditates upon;
िकम् – what; िच यित – meditates; िनि  ः  – one who has transcended
thoughts; ि तीयम् – second; यः  – who; न – not; प ित – sees
16. He, who sees the supreme Brahman, meditates upon ‘I am
Brahman’. He who has transcended all thoughts and when he sees
‘no second’, what should he meditate upon?
In the verse here, Aṣṭāvakra points out the subtle distinction between
the two higher states in meditation. At the earlier stage the student,
as a result of his deep study and long reflection, becomes
intellectually convinced of the one infinite immutable Reality which is
the substratum for the illusory play of names and forms that
constitute the universe. Here, the student ‘sees the supreme
Brahman’ meaning, he intellectually conceives the Existence and
understands the nature of the supreme Reality. At this stage the
student should strive to meditate on, ‘I am Brahman’ (aham
brahmāsmi). Through this meditation and continuous assertion ‘I am
Brahman’ he achieves his total detachment from his equipments and
discovers his identity with the infinite Self. This stage is defined as
‘samādhi with thought’ (savikalpa samādhi).
As a result of this spiritual practice and long self-discipline, the
ego ends, the illusory world of perceptions cease and the seeker
awakes to become the sage of direct spiritual experience. He
transcends his intellect and its thoughts and experiences the one
without a second. Having thus reached this state of Consciousness,
wherein he has discovered his perfect identity with the Brahman,
Aṣṭāvakra asks very pertinently: ‘Upon what should he meditate?’
Until we sleep, we can try to sleep, but having slept who is there
to try? Having reached the state of Self, where is the seeker to
meditate? And try to reach what? On reaching the goal the
pilgrimage has ended. On realising the Self, meditation has
culminated. The meditator has become the meditated. In this great
awakening, the ego has ended along with its dreams. The ego has
become the one Self everywhere.
Describing such a Man of Perfection, who has reached his
spiritual goal, Ᾱcārya Śaṅkara sings in his Vivekacūḍāmaṇi: ‘He who
giving up all considerations of the fitness or otherwise of objects of
meditation, lives as the absolute Ᾱtman. He is indeed Śiva Himself,
the best among the knowers of Brahman.’5
  ो  येना िव ेपो  िनरोधं  कु  ते   सौ।
उदार ु  न  िवि  ः  सा ाभावा रोित  िकम्॥१७॥
dṛṣṭo yenātma-vikṣepo nirodhaṁ kurute tvasau,
udārastu na vikṣiptaḥ sādhyābhāvāt-karoti kim. (17)
  ः  – is seen, experienced; येन – by whom; आ िव ेपः  – distraction in
himself; िनरोधं  कु  ते – practises self-control; तु – indeed; असौ – he;
उदारः – the noble-minded great one; तु – but; न – not; िवि  ः  –
distracted; सा अभावात्  – having nothing to accomplish; करोित –
does; िकम्  – what
17. He who experiences distractions in himself indeed must control
himself. But the noble-minded great one is not distracted at all.
Having nothing to accomplish, what should he do?
At the ‘non-apprehension’ of the Reality ‘misapprehensions’ are
entertained by the mind. Spiritual ‘ignorance’ is, therefore, the cause
for the ego and its perceptions of the world. As a limited ego when it
recognises the world of plurality, it gets distracted with enjoyments of
the perceived world. As a spiritual seeker then, the egocentric
sādhaka must necessarily practise ‘self-control’ in order to turn his
mind away from the fields of his passions and to persuade it to
contemplate upon the peaceful Self. The imperfect must strive to
reach perfection.
But to the sage, who is Liberated in life, who knows no
distractions, who is ever living the blissful peace of the infinite
Perfection, he has nothing to accomplish and, therefore, what has he
to do? He has nothing more to gain! He has become the Self. His
mind has ended. His ego has merged. The world dream has rolled
away from him. He is the Self – ever all-pervading and immutable. A
sage knows no meditation.
धीरो  लोकिवपय  ो  वत मानोऽिप  लोकवत्।
न  समािधं  न  िव ेपं  न  लेपं      प ित॥१८॥
dhīro loka-viparyasto vartamāno'pi lokavat,
na samādhiṁ na vikṣepaṁ na lepaṁ svasya paśyati. (18)
धीरः  – the wise man; लोकिवपय  ः  – reverse of the common man;
वत मानः  – existing; अिप – though; लोकवत्  – like an ordinary man; न –
not; समािधम् – absorption; न – not; िव ेपम् – distraction; न – not; लेपम्
– involvement;     – of his own; प ित – sees
18. The wise man though living like an ordinary person is the reverse
of the common man. He sees neither absorption, nor distraction nor
involvement of himself.
A sage of spiritual vision lives like any other ordinary man in the
world and he pursues normal life. Yet, he is the reverse of the
common man in his estimate of himself and the world around. We,
the common folk, consider the world of sense objects as real and to
us spiritual essence is a matter of doubt, a questionable hypothesis
of the subtle philosophers. To the Realised sage, the Self alone is
the one Reality and he lives It constantly in his experience. To him
the world of objects are all illusions of the human mind.
A sage of inward constant Experience Divine recognises nothing
– neither absorption (samādhi), nor distraction (vikṣepa) – for he has
transcended his mind, and samādhi and vikṣepa are the conditions
of the mind, nor does he himself ever get involved (lepam) in the
world of activity. This does not mean that he will not act. He
constantly serves the world; but he never gets involved meaning, he
never acts with ego and egocentric desires and as such, no vāsanās
are created in him by his activities. Thus ‘he is the reverse of the
common man’.
भावाभाविवहीनो  य  ृ ो  िनवा सनो  बुधः।
नैव  िकि त्  कृ तं  तेन  लोक   ा  िवकु व ता॥१९॥
bhāvābhāva-vihīno yastṛpto nirvāsano budhaḥ,
naiva kiñcit kṛtaṁ tena loka-dṛṣṭyā vikurvatā. (19)
भाव  अभाविवहीनः  – transcends existence and non-existence; यः  – who;
तृ ः  – contented; िनवा सनः  – free from desires; बुधः  – wise; न – not; एव
– even; िकि त्  – anything; कृ तम्  – done; तेन – by him; लोक   ा  – in
the sight of the world; िवकु व ता – acting vigorously
19. He, who transcends existence and non-existence, who is wise,
contented, free from desires, does nothing, even if he be acting
vigorously in the eyes of the world.
In the world outside, the public may recognise that the Liberated in
life is dynamically engaging himself in vigorous programmes of
service to the society. Yet, a Man of Perfection ‘does nothing’, in the
sense that his actions are not actions at all, in the ordinary sense of
the word.
We act in the world, motivated by our egocentric desires. Such
actions, undertaken with ego and egocentric desires, leave their
reactions upon us in the form of vāsanās. A Man of Realisation has
ended his ego. ‘He is contented and free from desires’ and,
therefore, his actions are no more actions.
‘He has transcended both existence and non-existence’.
Existence meaning here his identification with the body, mind and
intellect and non-existence standing for the subtle unmanifested
vāsanās left in him by his past actions. Since he has no identification
either with his gross or subtle or his causal body, his actions can be
considered neither as selfish nor selfless works. At best they can be
considered only as a sport, a play (līlā).
When a child is at play, we cannot call it ‘a work’ though the child
expresses its intelligence and exhausts its energy. It has nothing to
gain by the play nor will the child lose anything by not playing. Its
play is but a natural explosion of its energy! Thus ‘works’ the
Liberated in life, in any field that comes to him unasked. There is no
impulse of desire behind any of his activities.
These few verses form a beautiful and exhaustive discourse
upon the ‘actionless action’ recommended by the Bhagavad-gītā: ‘He
who recognises inaction in action and action in inaction is wise
among men; he is a yogī and a true performer of all actions.’6
 वृ ौ  वा  िनवृ ौ  वा  नैव  धीर   दु  हः।
यदा  य त ु मायाित  त ृ  ा  ित तः  सुखम्॥२०॥
pravṛttau vā nivṛttau vā naiva dhīrasya durgrahaḥ,
yadā yatkartum-āyāti tatkṛtvā tiṣṭhataḥ sukham. (20)
 वृ ौ – in activity; वा – or; िनवृ ौ – in inactivity; वा – or; न – not; एव –
surely; धीर  – of the wise one; दु  हः  – trouble, uneasiness; यदा –
   ि
which; यत्  – what; कतु म्  – to do; आयाित – comes; तत्  – that; कृ  ा  –
doing; ित तः  – living; सुखम्  – happily
20. The wise one, who lives on happily, doing what comes to him to
be done, does not feel trouble (uneasy) either in activity or in
inactivity.
The Man of Realisation has nothing to gain for himself by
undertaking an activity nor has he to lose anything by not doing; yet,
he is seen to be constantly engaged in various programmes of
service. This is explained in the following verse by Lord Kṛṣṇa in
Gītā: ‘Nor is there anything unattained that should be attained by Me;
yet, I engage Myself in action’7.
Aṣṭāvakra here explains that into the activities that reach him
uninvited – as demanded by his age, for the benefit of the
community – he plunges fully, recognising them as his prārabdha.
While his body, mind and intellect are functioning in their
respective fields, he remains unaffected, constantly rooted in his
experience of the divine Self, observing, along with the universe
around him, his own equipments expressing in the field of action.
Since he is so fully established in the experience of the one Self
everywhere, his equipments can never dance except to the melody
of Life Divine. No discordant note can ever come into the songful
actions of such a perfect Master.
Be he in the fields of activity or be he in retirement, he is equally
peaceful, contented and blissful. In no activity is he ever a ‘doer’ or
an ‘enjoyer’. There is no ego in him. He revels as the Self, his
equipments act in His divine presence within!!
िनवा सनो  िनराल ः     ो  मु ब नः ।
ि  ः  सं ारवातेन  चे ते  शु पण  वत्॥२१॥
nirvāsano nirālambaḥ svacchando mukta-bandhanaḥ,
kṣiptaḥ saṁskāra-vātena ceṣṭate śuṣka-parṇavat. (21)
िनवा सनः – desireless; िनराल ः  – autonomous (independent);    ः
– free; मु ब नः  – free from bondage; ि  ः  – blown; सं ारवातेन –
by wind of effects of past actions; चे ते – moves; शु पण  वत् – like a
dry leaf
21. Blown by the wind of effects of the past actions (saṁskāras), the
desireless, independent, free and liberated person moves about like
a dry leaf.
To one who has realised the Infinitude, he has no more vanity of his
body, in fact, he has no more use for it. It is something like a dry leaf
that has fallen away from a tree, when its functions are ended for the
tree! The body-mind-intellect equipments have already dried up,
curled and fallen away from the wise man; they are of no use to him,
the Self-realised.
Not only the leaf dances on the branches of the tree, but the
fallen leaf again, apparently seems to be very dynamic and active
when it is blown hither and thither by the passing breeze! To the
ignorant eyes of men, a sage also seems to be acting in the world
outside. The body of the enlightened, when it functions in the world,
does so not prompted by his ego and egocentric desires. Aṣṭāvakra
explains that like a dry leaf that is blown here and there by the
whimsical breeze, so too, the equipments of a Man of Perfection
move about in different directions set by its prārabdha.
The past actions leave deep and powerful vāsanās, which
channelise all the thought flow into definite directions, in each
individual. These thought channels, that determine the character of
an individual, made by the cumulative effects of his entire past, are
called saṁskāras. One yogī may spend all his lifetime in quietude, in
a solitary cave plunged in samādhi. Another one may move about in
the society, like a mad man, miserably clad, careless of his food,
sleeping perhaps on the footpath, exposed to the sun and rain! Yet
another, may take great programmes for the cultural revival of a
country and for the moral rehabilitation of his community! One may
found a religion, and another may float a mission! None of them is
responsible for any of his actions because there is no doer ego in
any one of them. Their actions are determined by their prārabdha
and they are never involved in any of their activities. They live in a
realm where our praises and abuses cannot even reach them!
The analogy of the dry leaf moving without any purpose, shunted
here and there, by the amorous breeze, is a very striking example for
the propelling force working behind a spiritual Master in his life after
his Self-rediscovery.
असंसार   तु   ािप  न  हष   न  िवषादता।
स  शीतलमना  िन ं  िवदेह  इव  राजते॥२२॥
asaṁsārasya tu kvāpi na harṣo na viṣādatā,
sa śītalamanā nityaṁ videha iva rājate. (22)
असंसार  – one who has transcended worldly experience; 
तु – indeed;   - अिप – anywhere; न – not; हष ः  – joy; न – not; िवषादता –
sorrow; सः – he; शीतलमना – tranquil minded; िन म् – ever; िवदेहः –
one without a body; इव – as if; राजते – exists
22. Never is joy or sorrow, for one who has transcended the worldly
experiences. Tranquil in mind, he lives like one without a body.
Once the ego is transcended, the identifications with the body and
the mind have also ended. In the mind alone the sensations of joy
and sorrow can arise. These are different modifications of the mind.
These disturbances can reach the mind only with reference to a
desire fulfilled or a desire flouted. To the Realised saint there are
neither ego nor desires and, therefore, his mind is ever tranquil, as
thought agitations cannot rise to disturb his bosom.
In this divine inner peace, the Man of Perfection constantly
experiences the supreme state of infinite Consciousness and his
body, as explained earlier, unmotivated by personal desires, moves
about prompted by its own prārabdha. In his physical reactions with
the world around, he seems to be so careless about his body, as he
is not himself constantly conscious of his equipments. Aṣṭāvakra
here points out the stepmotherly attitude of a Man of Perfection
towards his own body and its destiny, and the sage exclaims in his
song, that the Liberated in life ‘lives like one without a body’.
This supreme state is practically described in Yoga-vāsiṣṭha:
‘Later, having reached holy of the holies, this unborn state, his
tranquil mind established in It, he never grieves even amidst the
greatest calamities.’8
कु  ािप  न  िजहासाऽ    नाशो  वाऽिप  न  कु  िचत्।
आ ाराम   धीर   शीतला तरा नः॥२३॥
kutrāpi na jihāsā'sti nāśo vā'pi na kutracit,
ātmārāmasya dhīrasya śītalācchatarātmanaḥ. (23)
कु  ािप – anywhere; न – not; िजहासा – desire to renounce; अ   – is;
नाशः  – loss; वा – or; अिप – even; न – not; कु  िचत्  – anywhere;
आ ाराम  – one who delights in the Self; धीर  – of the wise man;
शीतल  अ तर  आ नः  – whose mind is serene and pure
23. The wise, who delights in the Self, whose mind is serene and
pure, has no desire to renounce anything whatsoever, nor does he
feel any loss anywhere.
On transcending the mind alone is the state of Self-realised. The
thought flow that constitutes the mind cannot dry up until its source,
the egocentric desire, has been completely eliminated. When thus
the ego has ended and the mind flouted, the delusory vision of the
world should completely end and, therefore, to the ‘the wise man
who delights in the Self’, there can be ‘no desire to renounce
anything whatsoever’. He sees nothing to be renounced! His mind is
serene and pure (śītalācchatarātmanaḥ). Serene and extremely
pure, meaning completely ‘agitationless’9.
This does not mean that he will hold on to everything in the world!
For, a worldly man also does not want to renounce anything! To
clarify this position the sage continues: ‘Nor does he feel any loss
anywhere’. The man of enlightenment comes to live in such a
different dimension altogether that no loss in the relative world of
finite objects around him nor within him, can affect, even in the least,
the infinite joys of the immutable Self. Transcending the body and
mind, the ego in the wise man, has now awakened to the blissful
Self.
 कृ  ा  शू िच    कु व तोऽ   य  या।
 ाकृ त  ेव  धीर   न  मानो  नावमानता॥२४॥
prakṛtyā śūnya-cittasya kurvato'sya yadṛcchayā,
prākṛtasyeva dhīrasya na māno nāvamānatā. (24)
 कृ  ा  – by nature; शू िच    – void in mind; कु व तः  – doing; अ   –
this; य  या – what comes of itself unasked;  ाकृ त   इव – like a
common man; धीर  – of the wise one; न – not; मानः  – honour; न –
not; अवमानता – dishonour
24. Void in mind by nature and doing what comes of itself unasked,
the wise one, unlike a common man, is not affected by honour or
dishonour.
The Liberated in life by his very nature becomes ‘void in mind’ as the
thought flow in him has ceased. He has transcended his mind. No
modifications can disturb the mental stuff in him. He spends his time
performing whatever work comes to him unasked, prompted by his
prārabdha! Though he is thus living in our world, functioning like any
one of us, unlike us, it is immaterial for him whether he is revered or
cursed for his activities. His body acts on the stage of the world as
the dry leaves which are blown here and there by the passing
breeze. The wise man’s actions are all prompted by a higher will,
ever divinely kind and always sweetly merciful. The Lord of the
universe (Jagadīśvara) functions through him. Honour and dishonour
are judgements of the intellect; to one who has transcended his
intellect, where is the honour? What is the dishonour?
कृ तं  देहेन  कम दं  न  मया  शु  िपणा।
इित  िच ानुरोधी  यः  कु व  िप  करोित  न॥२५॥
kṛtaṁ dehena karmedaṁ na mayā śuddha-rūpiṇā,
iti cintānurodhī yaḥ kurvannapi karoti na. (25)
कृ तम्  – done; देहेन – by the body; कम  – work; इदम् – this; न – not; मया
– by me; शु  िपणा – of pure nature; इित  िच ा  अनुरोधी – thus
confirming to such thoughts; यः  – who; कु व न्  – acting; अिप – though;
करोित – acts; न – not
25. One who acts in conformity with thoughts such as: ‘This is done
by the body and not by me, the pure Self’ – such a person even
though acting does not act.
An action is not a mere movement of limbs. Without a wilful ego an
action is never performed. In deep sleep, if you kick with your foot,
even your own Guru, it is not an act. Whatever a child does is not
considered as an action. Action is an action where there is an
egocentric wilfulness.
A Liberated in life is one who lives constantly in the experience
that he is the Self and that all activities done in the world are done by
his body and mind, drawing their vitality from the Self, all by
themselves and that he is not involved in these activities. Thus, there
is no ego to receive the results of those actions of the body and
therefore, Aṣṭāvakra-gītā here declares: ‘Even though acting he does
not act’ (kurvannapi karoti na).
This idea is one of the vibrant thoughts running through and
through the Bhagavad-gītā.10 Upaniṣads repeatedly thunder this
idea. Mystic Masters of all eras in India have again and again
confirmed the truth of this statement with their own inward
experiences.
अत ादीव  कु  ते  न  भवेदिप  बािलशः।
जीव ु ः  सुखी   ीमान्  संसर िप  शोभते॥२६॥
atad-vādīva kurute na bhaved-api bāliśaḥ,
jīvanmuktaḥ sukhī śrīmān saṁsarannapi śobhate. (26)
अत ादी  इव – like one who does not say why; कु  ते – acts; न – not;
भवेत्  – is; अिप – even though; बािलशः  – dullard, fool; जीव ु ः  –
Liberated in life; सुखी – happy;  ीमान्  – blessed; संसरन्  – in the world;
अिप – even; शोभते – flourishes
26. The Liberated in life even though acts like one, who does not say
why he is acting so, is not, thereby, a fool. He flourishes in the world
and is happy and even blessed.
An intelligent man plans his activities and expects to achieve his
chosen goal or earn his purpose. He is clear of his motives. He is
precise of his intentions. But an unintelligent fool, if he is questioned,
due to his foolishness, cannot say for what purpose he is doing a
piece of work. He is unconscious of his intentions. He is not
intelligent enough to recognise that his activities are to achieve a
definite goal of his. If such a fool were to be asked why he has
undertaken a certain activity, he is not able to state his motive (atad-
vādī)11.
The liberated in life, under the force of the prārabdha of his body,
spontaneously acts in the world, mainly to establish goodwill among
mankind. But if we were to ask him why he is undertaking such
endeavours, he has no answer to give, he can only smile. His
actions are without any personal motives; they are all programmes of
activities expressing through him as ordained by the Lord of the
universe.
Here the fool is not able to answer because he is far below the
average in his mind and intellect. The wise man is not able to answer
the same questions because he is so much arisen above the mind-
intellect equipment.
Even though living in this world, wherein we suffer our daily
tensions, stresses and conflicts, the liberated in life, as he has no
ego in him, ‘is ever happy and blessed’.
नानािवचारसु ा ो  धीरो  िव ा  मागतः।
न  क ते  न  जानाित  न   णोित  न  प ित॥२७॥
nānā-vicāra-suśrānto dhīro viśrāntim-āgataḥ,
na kalpate na jānāti na śṛṇoti na paśyati. (27)
नानािवचारसु ा ः  – withdrawing from diverse reasonings; धीरः  – the
wise one; िव ा  म्  – complete repose; आगतः  –attains; न – not; क ते
– thinks; न – not; जानाित – knows; न – not;  णोित – hears; न – not;
प ित – sees
27. The wise man who has withdrawn himself from diverse
reasonings and has attained complete repose, neither thinks nor
knows nor hears nor sees.
The divine experience of the infinite Self is beyond all reason. It is
not intellectual appreciation, but it is a spiritual apprehension, gained
when the meditator transcends his intellect. Once the Man of
Perfection has reached this blissful state of total repose, it being the
state of the immutable Self, never again can he ever be shunted out
of it into the realm of the mind, to be mercilessly tossed about there,
amidst its endless agitations.
The ego in him has ended and, therefore, there cannot be in him
either the sense of ‘doership’ or the sense of ‘enjoyership’.
Therefore, ‘he neither thinks nor knows nor hears nor sees’. It is the
subject ego who identifies with the intellect, mind and the sense
organs and arrogates the sense of individuality as a ‘thinker’–I, or a
‘feeler’–I, or a ‘knower’–I, or a ‘perceiver’–I. With the end of the ego
all these functions have ended. The enlightened one has attained
the peaceful repose of the infinite Self.
असमाधेरिव ेपा   मुमु ुन   चेतरः।
िनि    क  तं  प न ्     ैवा  े  महाशयः॥२८॥
asamādher-avikṣepānna mumukṣurna cetaraḥ,
niścitya kalpitaṁ paśyan brahmaivāste mahāśayaḥ. (28)
असमाधेः  – not practising meditation; अिव ेपात्  – for having no
agitations; न  – not; मुमु ुः  – aspirant for Liberation; न – not; च – and;
इतरः  – the other (bound); िनि   – knowing for certain; क  तम् –
figment of imagination; प न ्  – seeing;     – Brahman; एव – as; आ े
– lives; महाशयः  – the wise one
28. Since the wise one has no agitations and does not practise
meditation, he is not an aspirant for Liberation nor is he, in bondage.
Having known the universe to be a figment of his imagination, even
though he sees it, he exists as Brahman itself.
The causes for agitations in man’s bosom are ego and his egocentric
desires. In the wise man, the vāsanās have ended and his ego has
sublimated. He lives in the Brāhmika-Consciousness and
experiences It as his own real nature.
Since there are no agitations, he will not be any longer trying to
control the mind's outgoing tendencies, through diligent practice of
meditation. The hungry alone needs to eat food; the thirsty alone
needs to drink, the agitated mind alone need practise meditation.
The sage who has already reached the goal and has thus awakened
to the divine nature, infinite and immutable, need not do any more
meditation. Since he is not meditating, he cannot be considered any
longer as an ‘aspirant for Liberation’ (mumukṣu). The fact is, he has
already liberated (mukta) himself from all his delusory entanglements
with his body, mind and intellect.
On awakening to the blissful Self, he has realised that the world
of names and forms that he has experienced was nothing but a
figment of his own imagination. He has awakened from the dream of
the subject-object world. Even if he now perceives the world, he
recognises it as a magic show. He has now become Brahman, ‘he
exists as Brahman itself’.
य ा ः   ादह ारो  न  करोित  करोित  सः।
िनरह ारधीरेण  न  िकि दकृ तं  कृ तम्॥२९॥
yasyāntaḥ syād-ahaṅkāro na karoti karoti saḥ,
nirahaṅkāra-dhīreṇa na kiñcid-akṛtaṁ kṛtam. (29)
य   – whose; अ ः  – within;  ात ्  – is; अह ारः  – sense of ego; न –
not; करोित – acts; (अिप – though); करोित – acts; सः  – he; िनरह ारधीरेण
– by the wise one who is free from sense of ego; न – not; िकि त्  –
anything; अकृ तम्  – undone; कृ तम्  – doing (and)
29. He who has the ego sense in him within, acts (mentally), even
though he does not act (physically). Surely, the wise one, who is free
from the sense of ego, does not act (mentally), even though he acts
(physically).
All actions spring from man’s ego and his egocentric desires. One
who is conscious of his separate individuality cannot avoid his ego
sense and truly, even if he is not physically working in the world
outside, says Aṣṭāvakra, ‘he acts (karoti saḥ)’. One who is extremely
conscious of his body and mind, even when he is sitting down for
meditation, though he is not apparently working in the world outside,
cannot quieten his mind and, therefore, is in a state of dynamic
activity within.
On the other hand, the sage, who has conquered his ego, is ever
revelling in the infinite Self and so is not acting at any time – be he in
a field of sevā, visibly functioning or be he at rest, sitting quietly,
without acting (na kiñcid akṛtaṁ kṛtam).12
This verse under commentary would be apparently contradicting
a later verse in this very same chapter.13 This contradiction is only
apparent. Sage is beyond both action and inaction. He has
transcended the equipments and, therefore, he is beyond the
influences of the pairs of opposites.
And this cannot mean that a sage can do anything. By his very
nature he has become perfect in his activities and thoughts. A sage
cannot really do wrong, as he is free from ego. All activities springing
from the sense of ego are selfish activities, which are what we
consider as immoral acts. He acts from a point above the moral
level, his very vision is universal and, therefore, actions springing
from him always carry the fragrance of his universal love. He has no
concern for good or evil, with morality or immorality. Whatever he
does constitutes the moral code for us to follow! The qualities of his
actions are the standards by which the world determines its sense of
righteousness; its concept of dharma.
When one performs his duties from his egocentre, it becomes
work and in work there can be good and evil, morality and
immorality. When a man performs in the outer world with a bosom
that has no ego to vitiate, he does not ‘work’ but he merely ‘acts’. In
a spontaneous inspired act there is no ego and as such divine acts
cannot create any vāsanās, positive or negative, in the personality of
the sage; such actions are to be considered as inactions or to
distinguish it clearly, we may call them as ‘actionless actions’.
नोि  ं  न  च  संतु मकतृ   विज  तम्।
िनराशं  गतस ेहं  िच ं  मु    राजते॥३०॥
nodvignaṁ na ca santuṣṭam-akartṛ-spanda-varjitam,
nirāśaṁ gata-sandehaṁ cittaṁ muktasya rājate. (30)
न – not; उि  म्  – troubled; न – not; च – and; संतु म्  – pleased; अकतृ  –
actionless;   विज  तम्  – free from fluctuations; िनराशम् – desireless;
गतस ेहम् – purged of doubts; िच म् – mind; मु    – of the Liberated
one; राजते – shines
30. The mind of the Liberated is neither troubled nor pleased. It is
actionless, free from fluctuations, desireless and purged of all
doubts.
The Liberated in life is one who has directly experienced the Self and
has, therefore, awakened to be pure Consciousness. As such he has
arisen above the mind-intellect equipment and their oscillations.
Naturally, he is free from passions, attachments, ego thoughts and
desires.
This verse marshals a team of arguments justifying the
declaration made in the previous verse. An individual, who has thus
emptied himself in the within, is a sage, who acts and even when he
is acting, is not ‘troubled’ by passions (na-udvignam), because, he is
free from love and hatred. He has no attachments and, therefore, he
is contented and ‘pleased’ (santuṣṭaḥ). Since there is no ego in him
he is ‘actionless’ (a-kartṛ). He has risen above his mind-intellect
equipment and, therefore, thought agitations cannot disturb him at all
– ‘he is free from fluctuations (spanda-varjitam)’. He has gained all
that is to be gained and in the fullness of his supreme satisfaction he
has become ‘desireless’ (nirāśam). In the vivid experience of the
Infinitude he has no more doubts regarding the nature of the
absolute goal (gata-sandeham).
िन ा तुं  चेि तुं  वािप  य   ं  न   वत ते।
िनिन िम िमदं  िक ु  िन ा यित  िवचे ते॥३१॥
nirdhyātuṁ ceṣṭituṁ vāpi yaccittaṁ na pravartate,
nirnimittamidaṁ kintu nirdhyāyati viceṣṭate. (31)
िन ा तुम्  – to meditate; चेि तुम्  – to act; वा – or; अिप – also; यत् - िच म् –
whose mind; न – not;  वत   ते – engages itself; िनिन   िम म्  – without
any motive; इदम्  – this; िक ु – but; िन ा यित – meditates; िवचे ते –
acts
31. The mind of the Liberated one does not engage itself either in
meditation or in activity. It becomes meditative and active without
any motive spontaneously.
The Liberated in life lives as the Self, in the Self. He dwells above
the mind. From where he is, he cannot even recognise the
clamorous mind or his functioning body. Therefore, he cannot
continue meditation, either for the purpose of withdrawing his sense
organs or to calm down the pulsations of thoughts in his mind.
Meditation is the function that an ego can undertake for its
awakening. The already awakened can no longer pursue meditation.
Having reached the destination how can we continue walking the
route by which we reach our destination?
At the same time we should not misunderstand that a Man of
Perfection is living a life as we live: a victim of the lusts of his body,
of the passions of his mind and of the restlessness of his intellect.
The enlightened one is constantly established in the state of his
highest meditation, ever revelling in the Self, be he in meditation or
in apparent activities. Spontaneity is the essence of his entire living.
When he is quiet, in him we see the Divine at rest. When he acts, in
him we watch the Divine in action.
त  ं  यथाथ माक    म ः   ा ोित  मूढताम्।
अथवायाित  स ोचममूढः  कोऽिप  मूढवत्॥३२॥
tattvaṁ yathārtham-ākarṇya mandaḥ prāpnoti mūḍhatām,
athavāyāti saṅkocam-amūḍhaḥ ko'pi mūḍhavat. (32)
त म् – Truth; यथाथ म्  – real; आक   – hearing; म ः  – the unintelligent
person;  ा ोित – gets; मूढताम्  – confused; अथवा – or; स ोचं  याित –
withdraws within; अमूढः  – intelligent man; कः  अिप – some; मूढवत्  –
like a fool
32. An unintelligent person becomes confused on hearing the real
Truth, but some intelligent man withdraws within (and lives) like a
fool.
A subtle intellect trained to meditate and move within, exploring the
depths of one’s own personality, is absolutely necessary for a
spiritual seeker in order to digest what the scriptures talk about the
absolute nature of the supreme Self. A primary school student, in his
immaturity, may become completely confused and extremely
disturbed if he were taught Einstein’s Relativity Theory, with all its
subtle mathematical and scientific implications. The same student if
he is allowed to cultivate scientific knowledge and having educated
himself upto his graduate standard, thereafter if he is given a course
in Einstein's Theory, it should not be difficult for the same student to
grasp its implications in the entirety of its real depths.
The ‘unintelligent’ (mandaḥ) means one whose thoughts are
turned towards sense gratifications and, therefore, not available for
serene and deep reflections. Such an individual if he were to listen to
a discourse given out by a sage upon the highest transcendental
Truth in all its absolute glory, such an unprepared student is sure to
get confused.
The same discourse when listened to by a student who has
prepared himself with all the disciplines necessary for the
comprehension of the infinite Self, gets himself rocketed into his own
within, to experience therein the peaceful Self. At this juncture, that
student, may be considered by the worldly people as a ‘fool’
(mūḍhaḥ), who is not taking any active part in the competitive world,
acquiring wealth, running after objects, panting in passions, indulging
in mad revelry and generally getting torn apart between likes and
dislikes, through joy and sorrow, amidst pleasure and pain!!
Hence, Aṣṭāvakra uses the simile ‘like a fool’ – he is not a fool but
he is like a fool. A fool is incapable of under-taking any activity in the
outer world and, is ever an idler. Yet, he is never quiet as he is full of
desires and, so, his mind would be constantly in agitation. A wise
man also remains without activities, but his mind is ever quiet and
serene within, because in him there are no desires.
Emphasising the need for preparation of the student before he
enters the halls of Vedānta, Yogavāsiṣṭha humorously declares: ‘We
don’t know how to explain saving Truth of Spiritual life to persons
who are gross, with uncontrolled senses, or passions, who are
drowned in lusty enjoyments. Let them learn it all from women who
are dressed in their lack of intelligence!’14
एका ता  िनरोधो  वा  मूढैर  त े  भृशम्।
धीराः  कृ   ं  न  प     सु वत्   पदे    थताः॥३३॥
ekāgratā nirodho vā mūḍhair-abhyasyate bhṛśam,
dhīrāḥ kṛtyaṁ na paśyanti suptavat svapade sthitāḥ. (33)
एका ता – concentration; िनरोधः  – control of the mind; वा – or; मूढैः  – by
the fools; अ  त े – is practised; भृशम्  – repeatedly; धीराः  – the wise;
  
कृ  म्  – anything to be attained (done); न – not; प     – sees;
सु वत्  – like persons in sleep;  पदे – in one’s own Self;   थताः  –
abiding
33. The fools constantly practise concentration and control of the
mind. The wise, abiding in their own Self, like persons in deep sleep,
do not find anything to be attained.
Here the term ‘fool’ is used to indicate those who are still conscious
of their body and mind and, therefore, in whom the ego is very
aggressive. One who is conscious of his body and mind, so long as
he is in this ego state of consciousness, will and must practise self-
control of the sense organs and concentration of his mind. But the
Liberated in life, who is already revelling in his own Self, has his
mind flouted, his ego driven out, finds nothing more to be attained!
‘He is’, Aṣṭāvakra explains, ‘like a person in deep sleep’. One who is
in dreamless sleep is not conscious of his body or of the world of
plurality. There is no misapprehension in him. The sage who is
apprehending the Self, also does not see or experience any
‘misapprehensions’ of the equipments, or their fields of experiences.
The Liberated sage lives in a world of his own, away from our
natural fields of experiences, ever awakened to the infinite presence
of the blissful Self everywhere. To such an individual, who is
constantly living as the Self, in the Self, upon what is he to meditate?
With what? What is he to withdraw from? He has reached his Goal
Supreme.
If Aṣṭāvakra is giving us a direct flight to the realm of Reality in
this verse, Yogavāsiṣṭha at one point is kind enough to indicate to us
the various stages enroute to this benign destination: ‘First through
cultivated discrimination our attachment dies away. Thereafter
aversions are removed from us along with their roots (the ego).
Thereafter slowly the very effort of meditation calms down, when he
reaches that glorious state where True Discrimination (Self) really
is!’15
अ य ात्   य ा ा  मूढो  ना ोित  िनवृ ितम्।
त िन यमा ेण   ा ो  भवित  िनवृ तः॥३४॥
aprayatnāt prayatnādvā mūḍho nāpnoti nirvṛtim,
tattva-niścaya-mātreṇa prājño bhavati nirvṛtaḥ. (34)
अ य ात्  – from inaction;  य ात्  – from action; वा – or; मूढः  – the fool;
न – not; आ ोित – attains; िनवृ ितम्  – tranquillity; त िन यमा ेण  – simply
by knowing the Truth;  ा ः  – the wise one; भवित – becomes; िनवृ तः  –
tranquil
34. The fool does not attain tranquillity either by action or by inaction.
The wise one becomes tranquil merely by knowing the Truth.
The egocentric person who is extremely conscious of his body, mind
and intellect and naturally, whose attention is always turned in
catering to the endless gross and subtle demands of the body and
mind, is indicated here by the term ‘fool’. Such a person can never
reach mental tranquillity, either by ‘doing actions’ (prayatnāt), or by
suppression of them, by ‘not doing’ (aprayatnāt). For a time, every
seeker can, by his sheer willpower, suppress the flood of his desires
and look apparently a disciplined entity pursuing his path of spiritual
seeking. But he cannot awake to the state of pure Consciousness by
these methods. Activity in the sensuous world or apparent inactivity
towards them, are no criterion for the spiritual Realisation.
One who has eliminated his ego and purified his mind of his
sensuous vāsanās, such a seeker (prājñaḥ) alone has cultivated in
himself a mind which is ready for a flight in meditation. Such a
student is able to move in the direction indicated in the scriptures
and, therefore, as he is listening to his Teacher or reflecting upon
these great truths, comes to experience the state of Selfhood.
Here the term ‘action’ (prayatna) is used to indicate activities
prompted by desires. The term ‘inaction’ (aprayatnāt) is used here to
indicate the apparent state of quietude that we see in an individual,
attained through his mental suppressions! By either method we
cannot reach the state of tranquillity to be experienced in spiritual
Realisation.
The deep import of this verse reminds us of a similar statement in
the Bhagavad-gītā where the Lord is careful to explain that the Bliss
of the Self-realised is not due to any forced and artificial suppression
of desires: ‘But the man who rejoices only in the Self, who is satisfied
with the Self, who is content in the Self alone, for him, indeed, there
is nothing (more) to be done.’16
शु  ं  बु  ं  ि यं  पूण   िन प ं  िनरामयम्।
आ ानं  तं  न  जान    त ा ासपरा  जनाः॥३५॥
śuddhaṁ buddhaṁ priyaṁ pūrṇaṁ niṣprapañcaṁ nirāmayam,
ātmānaṁ taṁ na jānanti tatrābhyāsaparā janāḥ. (35)
शु म् – pure; बु म्  – enlightened; ि यम् – beloved; पूण म्  – perfect;
िन प म् – beyond the visible universe (transcendental); िनरामयम्  –
stainless; आ ानम् – Self; तम् – that; न – not; जान   – know; त  – in
this world; अ ासपराः – devoted to diverse practices; जनाः  – men
35. In this world those who devote themselves to diverse practices
do not know the Self which is pure, enlightened, beloved, perfect,
transcendental and stainless.
These verses are not to be misunderstood to mean that sādhanā is
unnecessary. Those who have not done sādhanā, Aṣṭāvakra
indicates them by the derogatory term 'fool' (mūḍhaḥ). But a
sādhaka must know that the sādhanā is the means and the direct
experience of the Infinite is the goal. Very often the seeker comes to
confuse the means for the very goal. In ordinary life this often
happens. Money is the means for happy living, but there are fools
who mistake the means for the end and get exhausted in their worry
for and anxiety of collecting money and, in their miserliness, they live
but a miserable life!
In the spiritual life do not be such a miserable fool! The various
practices of devotion to the Lord, service to the society, study of the
scriptures, reflection upon the truths and even meditation are all
means to awaken ourselves from the dreams of the ego and realise
our true nature. To students of higher meditation this warning is
appropriate and very necessary. Aṣṭāvakra-gītā is a dialogue
between the great sage and an equally great student, Janaka, and
hence, the discussion is at this high level. Early seekers should not
get confused.
ना ोित  कम णा  मो ं  िवमूढोऽ ास िपणा।
ध ो  िव ानमा ेण  मु     िवि यः ॥३६॥
nāpnoti karmaṇā mokṣaṁ vimūḍho'bhyāsa-rūpiṇā,
dhanyo vijñāna-mātreṇa muktas-tiṣṭhatyavikriyaḥ. (36)
न – not; आ ोित – attains; कम णा – by actions; मो म्  – Liberation;
िवमूढः  – a highly unintelligent person; अ ास िपणा – in the form of
yoga practice (control of mind); ध ः  – the blessed; िव ानमा ेण – by
mere intuitive enlightenment; मु ः  – liberated; ित ित – remains;
अिवि यः  – immutable
36. A highly unintelligent person never attains (the Self) through the
repeated practices of controlling his mind. The blessed one, through
mere intuitive enlightenment, remains liberated and immutable.
The statement made by Aṣṭāvakra in the previous verse must have
confused the student, as he has shaken the very bottom of the
student's faith! Just as in the karma-kāṇḍa portion of Vedas,
students get often attached to their rituals and they are made to
leave them when they step into the portion of Upaniṣad. The Teacher
has to jerk them out, so that, the mind of the student which has been
trained already in the ritual, may come to play in a higher and subtler
field of the ‘study of the scriptures’. Later on, the student is advised
to ‘meditate’ upon the Self, in order to make his mind still subtler, for
a deeper penetration of his enquiry into the secret chambers of the
pulsating ‘universal life’.
Now the sage here in this song is giving, as it were, that last kick
to the student, who is attached to his pursuit in the path of
meditation. The very act of meditation nourishes the ego in the
student and compels him to maintain a sense of meaningless
distinction between himself, the meditator, and the Truth that is
meditated upon.
The revered sage has already demonstrated that he can wield a
sharp pen and mercilessly scratch to wound the student and smear it
with ridicule so as to scorch away the student's stupidity out of his
personality once forever.17
Here again the Teacher adopts his usual style. He says, ‘A highly
unintelligent person (vimūḍhaḥ) does not attain Realisation through
his yoga practices by which he is trying to control his mind while ‘a
blessed one’ (dhanyaḥ), meaning an intelligent and true seeker, by
the right apprehension of the nature of the Self, ends all his sādhanā
and remains continuously revelling in the Self’. Meditation is the
means; experience of the Self is the end. To mechanically repeat
and to unintelligently hold on to the different practices is to maintain
a sense of distinction between the seeker and the Reality. These last
traces of the ego, the sense of individuality in the meditator, must
end. Then the subject merges with the object and the one Self alone
shines in all its infinite Bliss.
मूढो  ना ोित  त    यतो  भिवतुिम ित।
अिन  िप  धीरो  िह  पर    पभाक् ॥३७॥
mūḍho nāpnoti tad-brahma yato bhavitum-icchati,
anicchannapi dhīro hi parabrahma-svarūpabhāk. (37)
मूढः  – the fool; न – not; आ ोित – attains; तत्  – that;     – Brahman;
यतः  – as; भिवतुम् – to become; इ ित – desires; अिन न्  – without
desiring; अिप – even, धीरः  – the wise one; िह – surely;
पर    पभाक्  – enjoys the nature of the supreme Brahman
37. The fool does not attain Brahman, for he desires to become It!
The wise one certainly realises the nature of the supreme Brahman
even without desiring to do so.
The impulse behind all meditation is the desire to realise and this
very desire is the last link that holds the student on to the seat of his
struggles without allowing him to glide peacefully into the realm of
the pure Self. Therefore, this burning desire to realise (mumukṣutva)
is being removed from the bosom of the mature student by a
painless surgery in this verse. In the beginning the desire to gain the
spiritual vision is encouraged in the student because thereby his
mind, naturally and without effort, rolls away from all other objective
desires in order to fulfil this great desire for the subjective
illumination. When the student has become completely introvert, he
has to again lift himself from the scalding material world of the mind.
The mind is to be transcended. Thoughtless mind is the arbour for
enlightenment. So long as there is even the ‘desire to realise’ the
student cannot fold up his mind. This is exactly like the one who
complains that he can’t sleep, because of his very anxiety to sleep!
Thus, in the process of Vedānta, through efforts we give up our
desires for the world outside and for this the mind is mounted with
one sincere and deep desire to liberate. To give up this very ‘desire’
is the last effortless act, and in this effortlessness is the awakening.
That you want to become Brahman is a ‘wrong idea’. You can never
become Brahman. This is a ‘false notion’. You are already Brahman.
Never desire to become Brahman, you may desire to be Brahman!!
Such an individual, who has accomplished this last conscious act
of renunciation – of the very desire to realise – is the blessed one,
who attains the total unveiling of the Truth. Yogavāsiṣṭha roars: ‘I
victoriously live in this effulgent Consciousness as my own sole
essence’18.
In short, direct experience is gained through ‘vijñāna’ only. This
direct path to enlightenment does not recognise, at this moment, any
need for mental control brought about by the deep desire to liberate.
Even this spiritual desire feeds the ego and nourishes the sense of
separateness between the meditator and the meditated. At this
stage, when the student has already fulfilled all the previous
trainings, he must strive to remain in the divine state of just ‘Be’.
िनराधारा   ह  ाः  मूढाः  संसारपोषकाः।
एत ानथ मूल   मूल  े दः  कृ तो  बुधैः ॥३८॥
nirādhārā graha-vyagrāḥ mūḍhāḥ saṁsārapoṣakāḥ,
etasyānartha-mūlasya mūlacchedaḥ kṛto budhaiḥ. (38)
िनराधाराः – supportless;  ह  ाः  – eager for attainment of freedom;
मूढाः  – fools; संसारपोषकाः  – sustainer of the world; एत  – of this; अनथ 
मूल   – the root of misery; मूल    े दः – cutting at the root; कृ तः  – is
done; बुधैः  – by the wise
38. Without any support and eager for the attainment of freedom, the
fools only keep up the world! The wise cut at the very root of this
world, which is the source of all misery.
The perception of the pluralistic world of phenomena stems forth
from the ‘ignorance’ and the wise one cuts at the very root of this
tree of saṁsāra. The non-apprehension of the Reality (ignorance)
ends only in the apprehension of the Reality (Knowledge).
Compared to these wise ones, who thus strive to experience directly
that which lies beyond the hushed mind, Aṣṭāvakra here ridicules
those who, in their eagerness for gaining this revelation, spend their
entire time and energy in mental control and suppressions. Mind
itself is false and it roams about in its illusions of plurality. Instead of
destroying the very source of the mind, to strive to control the mind is
a waste of energy to a matured sādhaka. These instructions are
given not to the beginners; Janaka is a spiritual student trembling on
the verge of Realisation. To him is addressed the entire song by
Sage Aṣṭāvakra.
Without any support (nirādhāra) – The very mind and its
projections are all supported by the pure infinite Consciousness that
illumines all experiences. To try to control the mind from its
fascinations is like trying to control the dreamer in his behaviour in
the dream; it is like beating with a stick to kill the serpent in the rope.
On waking up, the dreamer is completely controlled; on seeing the
rope there is no serpent to be killed. On realising the Self, there is no
mind to control, nor a world of objects to be denied!
‘The source of all misery’ is the ignorance of the Self; the very
conscious effort in meditation indicates that the meditator is still in
the realm of ignorance perceiving his world of delusions. That is the
reason why Aṣṭāvakra declares that the foolish in their attachment to
meditation maintain in themselves the illusion of the world of
plurality.
Mental control is unavoidable in order to start meditation. In the
intense moments of meditation, the meditator must end in the
meditated. This take-off can occur only when even the last withering
whiffs of the insubstantial ego are surrendered by the meditator. He
must heave to experience the effulgent Self. This is the goal of the
great sage across the frontiers of the Real and the unreal, of the
True and the false, of the Permanent and impermanent. The student
is now on the verge of ignorance, hesitating to leap into the infinite
Reality. Students with the tempo and purity of Janaka alone can
understand the true import and significance of what the mystic
Master in Aṣṭāvakra is communicating here.
न  शा  ं  लभते  मूढो  यतः  शिमतुिम ित।
धीर   ं  िविनि    सव दा  शा मानसः॥३९॥
na śāntiṁ labhate mūḍho yataḥ śamitum-icchati,
dhīras-tattvaṁ viniścitya sarvadā śānta-mānasaḥ. (39)
न – not; शा  म् – peace; लभते – gains; मूढः  – the fool; यतः  – as;
शिमतुम्  – to be calm; इ ित – wants to get; धीरः  – the wise one; त म्
– Truth; िविनि   – knowing for certain; सव दा – ever; शा मानसः  –
tranquil in mind
39. Since the fool wants to get peace through control of his mind, he
does not gain it. The wise one knowing for certain the Truth, is ever
tranquil in mind.
The knowledge of the post alone can bring peace to the mind that is
agitated with the illusion of the ghost. Realisation of the Self alone
can fill the personality of a sage with ‘peace that passeth all
understanding’. The fool wants to ‘get peace’ and, therefore, he
struggles to control his mind. He misses it totally. The very struggle
in him brings conflicts in himself. If peace is something to be
attained, it will then, certainly, be lost also! The fool desires to gain
peace, ‘as though’ it has to be gained as a reward for his efforts in
controlling his mind! The very struggle in controlling the mind feeds
the mind and makes it strong. It is like trying to put down fire with
petrol, misunderstanding it to be water! Mind can never be controlled
by the mind. By rising above the mind-intellect alone can the
equipments be controlled. The wise one, experiencing for certain the
Self, in his direct vision, ‘is ever tranquil in his mind’ because he has
transcended his mind.
 ा नो  दश नं  त   यद्   मवल ते।
धीरा ं  तं  न  प     प  ा ानम यम ्॥४०॥
kvātmano darśanaṁ tasya yad-dṛṣṭam-avalambate,
dhīrās-taṁ taṁ na paśyanti paśyantyātmānam-avyayam. (40)
   – where; आ नः  – of the Self; दश नम् – knowledge; त   – whose;
यत्  – who;   म् – seeing the manifested world; अवल ते – resorts to;
धीराः  – the wise one; तंतम् – this and that; न – not; प     – see (but);
प     – see; आ ानम्  – Self; अ यम्  – immutable
40. Where is the vision of the Self to one who resorts to seeing the
manifested world? The wise do not see this and that, but see only
the immutable Self.
Without transcending the mind, the experience of the Self is
impossible, is the idea that is emphasised in this verse. The
perceptions of the body, the emotions of the mind and the thoughts
of the intellect together constitute an individual's manifested world of
experiences. So long as our awareness is thus turned outward, we
can be conscious of the world of multiplicity alone. Such an
individual can never come to be awake to the infinite glory of the
pure Self.
The Realised saints and sages, (‘the wise do not see this and
that’) see the immutable Reality alone. The true meditator rises
above the awareness of his equipments and, therefore, he no longer
apprehends the world of objects, emotions and thoughts. At such
moments of intense meditation, when the mind-intellect is completely
halted, the meditator plunges into the ‘meditated’ to be the Self. Here
he experiences the immutable supreme Reality.
The idea of the previous verse is expanded and emphasised
here, in saying that, so long as the seeker is trying to control the
wanderings of his mind with his mind, he may relatively quieten his
mind, but can never totally succeed. Rising above the mind is the
only method. ‘Renounce even the last lingering sense of
identification in the meditator’, this is the call sent out through the
pregnant suggestions of this fabulous verse!
In the worldly perception, there is always the subject-object
relationship. The one immutable Self is experienced only when the
objects merge into the subject.
   िनरोधो  िवमूढ   यो  िनब   ं  करोित  वै।
 ाराम  ैव  धीर   सव दाऽसावकृ ि मः॥४१॥
kva nirodho vimūḍhasya yo nirbandhaṁ karoti vai,
svārāmasyaiva dhīrasya sarvadā'sāvakṛtrimaḥ. (41)
   – where; िनरोधः  – control of the mind; िवमूढ   – of the supreme
fool; यः  – who; िनब   ं  करोित – strives; वै – indeed;  ाराम   – who
delights in the Self; एव – surely; धीर  – the wise one; सव दा –
always; असौ – that; अकृ ि मः  – spontaneous
41. Where is the control of the mind for the fool, who strives for it? To
the wise one who delights in the Self, it is indeed spontaneous and
perennial.
Aṣṭāvakra has not yet finished explaining why he had made a
criticism of all attempts at mental controls. To control the mind with
the mind is ineffectual; it is as laughable as an attempt to straighten
a dog’s tail! It is the very nature of the mind that it should gush out to
embrace the sense objects. Divorced from sense objects mind has
no existence at all!
Fools alone continue striving in the control of the mind. So long
as the striving exists, the mind continues and, therefore, such an
individual is characterised here as a fool. As a contrast to the foolish
sādhaka, the sage now indicates the condition of the wise man.
After controlling the mind from its wildest passions and lusts for
the sense objects, with that relatively quietened mind we must start
our sincere meditations. Meditation quietens the mind and this
extremely becalmed mind should be finally ignored by the meditator,
when he heaves into the field of his spiritual experience. ‘One who
thus delights in the Self’, to such an enlightened one, mental control
is ‘spontaneous and perennial’ inasmuch as he has risen above the
mind and in his realisation has understood that the mind itself was
an illusion!
All activities at controlling the mind strengthen the seeker’s
identification with the mind. The mind continues its existence fed by
its own recognition of this delusion. On awakening to the Self, the
mental control fulfils itself inasmuch as no more control of the mind is
possible, because, the illusion of the mind itself has been lifted from
the awareness of the Man of Realisation.
Early sādhakas should control the mind. It has been all along
repeated by us that this text is addressed to those who have already
risen to the outer frontiers of the unreal and are hesitating to take the
last step for the total merger of the individual Self with the universal
Self.
भाव   भावकः  कि    िकि  ावकोऽपरः।
उभयाऽभावकः  कि देवमेव  िनराकु लः॥४२॥
bhāvasya bhāvakaḥ kaścinna kiñcid-bhāvako'paraḥ,
ubhayā'bhāvakaḥ kaścid-evam-eva nirākulaḥ. (42)
भाव  – of existence; भावकः  – who thinks; कि त्  – someone; न – not;
िकि त्  भावकः  – who thinks that nothing is; अपरः  – someone else;
उभया  अभावकः  – who thinks neither; कि त्  एव – rarely one; एवम्  –
thus; िनराकु लः  – free from distractions
42. Some think that ‘existence’ is and others that ‘nothing’ is. Rare is
the one who thinks neither. He is perfectly serene, free from all
distractions.
To the cārvākas19 the world is ‘existence’. It is real. The manifested
world alone is the only ‘reality’. Some other thinkers, meaning a
group of Buddhists called the mādhyamikas, consider ‘nothing is’.
Applied to sādhanā, some consider that the Self is to be meditated
upon as ‘Existence-Knowledge-Bliss’ (Sat-Cit-Ᾱnanda); others
recommend that the Infinite is realised when the mind has non-
existent thoughts. According to them consciousness of an object is
the ‘knowledge of that object’. Therefore, objectless consciousness
is the pure infinite Self.
Hence Aṣṭāvakra exclaims, ‘Rare is the one, who thinks neither’
and adds ‘He is perfectly serene!’ The calm Self is the illuminator of
both the ‘existence’ of the mind, which is the source of the world of
plurality and the same Consciousness illumines the absence of mind
and, therefore, the ‘non-existence’ of the world of experiences.
The Self is ever peaceful. Never was a world ever created in it;
nor can we say that the world has been eliminated. The post remains
as the post, the ghost was only an illusion – its presence or absence
is of no concern to the post.
शु म यमा ानं  भावय    कु बु यः ।
न  तु  जान    संमोहा ाव ीवमिनवृ ताः॥४३॥
śuddham-advayam-ātmānaṁ bhāvayanti kubuddhayaḥ,
na tu jānanti saṁmohād-yāvajjīvam-anirvṛtāḥ. (43)
शु म्  – pure; अ यम्  – without a second; आ ानम्  – the Self; भावय  
– meditate; कु बु यः  – men of dull intellect; न – not; तु – but; जान   –
realise; संमोहात् – due to delusion; यावत्  जीवम्  – as long as they live;
अिनवृ ताः  – unhappy
43. Those of dull intellect meditate upon the Ᾱtman as pure and one
without a second, but they do not realise It. Through delusion they
remain unhappy as long as they live.
Our identification with the intellect is so powerful and strong at this
moment that even a student at meditation remains as a mere
intellectual being, toying with the ideas of the pure Self, the one
without a second. With these terms of meditation they do not really
meditate, but they only tie themselves down with the suggestive
ideas with which the Upaniṣads have, in infinite mercy, indicated the
Truth to us. No doubt the meditation is the means to awaken and to
realise. To ‘Be’ the Self is the goal.
The dull intellects, somehow or other, retain, deep in themselves,
the unconscious idea that the Self is something to be perceived, to
be gained, to be achieved! Ᾱtman is the ‘Subject’, the very being in
the meditator and it can never, never be objectified. It does not mean
that we should not think of the Self. Thinking about the nature of the
Self is the only way by which one can turn one’s mind away from all
its preoccupations. But the final leap is not to become Brahman but
just to ‘Be’ Brahman.
Brahman is not a state to become, it is just to ‘Be’. The dullards
apprehend It not, because of this delusion in them, that the Self is to
be gained through meditation! They continue their meditation all
through their life, yet, they remain ever unhappy, bound within the
mind-intellect entanglements.
मुमु ोबु   राल म रेण  न  िव ते।
िनराल ैव  िन ामा  बु  मु     सव दा॥४४॥
mumukṣor-buddhir-ālambam-antareṇa na vidyate,
nirālambaiva niṣkāmā buddhir-muktasya sarvadā. (44)
मुमु ोः  – of one aspiring for Liberation; बु  ः  – intellect; आल म्  –
support; अ रेण  – without; न – not; िव ते – remains; िनराल ा –
without any support; एव – surely; िन ामा – free from desires; बु  ः  –
intellect; मु    – of the Liberated one; सव दा – ever
44. The intellect of one who aspires for Liberation cannot function
without a supporting object. But the desireless intellect of the
Liberated one is, indeed, ever without any support (in meditation).
‘The desire for Liberation’ (mumukṣutvam) is a mighty power to be
used by a student in his early days of spiritual sādhanā. It maintains
the student in the spiritual field and encourages him to pursue the
path of meditation. But here the Teacher is pointing to a stage in
meditation wherein even this anxiety to realise the Self is a shackle
that ties him down to the relative field of his intellect. ‘One who
aspires for Liberation’ is the one who has not yet gained the Self
and, therefore, is still an ego living in the field of the subject-object
experiences. As such the egocentric intellect in the seeker
consciously holds on to the Self, upon which he is meditating, as an
‘object’ other than himself!
The Liberated one has cleansed his intellect of even this ‘desire
to liberate’ and, therefore, he is in his meditation, ‘without any
support’ inasmuch as he is the Self!
We may meditate upon the Self, but the fulfilment of meditation is
in the direct experience of the Self wherein the experiencer and the
experienced are not two factors. To be awakened to the Self is to be
the Self. The dreamer when he awakes, he becomes the very waker.
िवषया ीिपनो  वी   चिकताः  शरणािथ नः।
िवश    झिटित   ोडं  िनरोधैका यिस ये॥४५॥
viṣayā-dvīpino vīkṣya cakitāḥ śaraṇārthinaḥ,
viśanti jhaṭiti kroḍaṁ nirodhaikāgrya-siddhaye. (45)
िवषयाः – sense objects;  ीिपनः – tigers; वी   – encountering; चिकताः –
the frightened one; शरणािथ नः – seeking refuge; िवश   – enter; झिटित
– at once;  ोडम् – the cave; िनरोधएका िस ये – for attaining control
and concentration
45. Encountering the tigers of sense objects, the frightened ones
seeking refuge at once enter the cave of the mind, for the attainment
of control and concentration.
An egocentric personality can never escape perceiving the sense
objects. The very instrument, by which they perceive the sense
objects, is the mind and the mind is fed by the sense objects, as they
bring storms of agitations into the mind and distract the mind from its
poise and concentration. Seekers in the beginning should try to turn
their attention away from all sense enjoyments, by remembering the
Lord and entering the ‘cave’ within, meaning their mind-intellect
equipments. Withdrawing the sense attention from the enchanting
objects and redirecting the mind to the greater Reality is one of the
antidote for the sensuous excitements. No doubt, in their early days,
seekers have no other remedy, available for them.
Here Aṣṭāvakra is advising the students who have gained
sufficient equipoise in themselves. He says the Liberated in life are
never frightened of the sense objects nor do they escape into the
‘cave’ for, they, in fact, perceive no plurality at all! The
Bṛhadāraṇyaka-upaniṣad thunders: ‘The perception of the other is,
indeed, the source of all fear’20.
There is an inherent contradiction in this scheme followed as an
early sādhanā. Mind is that which projects the sense objects and it is
the mind, again, that is running towards the objects. To run into the
mind is in fact equivalent to running into the mouth of the sense
objects themselves! In short, we cannot avoid the world of plurality
and its undivine enchantments by any horizontal movement.
Wherever you run, you are still a captive of your mind. Only by lifting
ourselves in the vertical movement to the higher plane of
Consciousness can we rise above the shackles of the mind.
ि     ी ि  
िनवा सनं  ह रं     ा  तू ी ं  िवषयद  नः।
पलाय े  न  श ा  े  सेव े  कृ तचाटवः॥४६॥
nirvāsanaṁ hariṁ dṛṣṭvā tūṣṇīṁ viṣayadantinaḥ,
palāyante na śaktāste sevante kṛtacāṭavaḥ. (46)
िनवा सनम् – desireless; ह रम् – lion;    ा – encountering; तू ीम ् –
quietly; िवषयद  नः  – the elephants of sense objects; पलाय े – run
away; न – not; श ाः  – able; ते – they; सेव े – serve; कृ त - चाटवः  –
flattering courtiers; (इव – like)
46. Encountering the desireless man-lion, the elephants of sense
objects, quietly run away; or, if unable to run away, serve him like
flattering courtiers!!
The glory of the Man of Perfection is pointed out here, indicating how
he lives amidst the sense objects, unmolested by them. In fact,
Aṣṭāvakra says that the sense objects run after him to serve him
faithfully, as flattering courtiers rush to serve their royal master.
Desires are expressions of vāsanās in our intellect. One who has
no vāsanās has no desires. It is the desire to enjoy in us that
entangles us with the sense objects. A desireless man perceives the
objects but he is not affected by them. A child in a toy shop is
excited, certainly not its father! Both of them are surrounded by toys,
but the child has the desire to possess them; its father has no more
those vāsanās in him.
The Liberated man moves about in the world, without any vāsanā
in him and, therefore, the sense objects cannot enchant him. The
consort of Indra may come and dance around Lord Parameśvara,
but the Lord of Kailāśa, gets least disturbed! In our mythology we
find many instances wherein the grey haired toothless sages,
plunged in meditation, woke up to dance with these enchanting
dancers of Indra’s court and thereby, the sages lost their mental
equanimity and balance, which they cultivated with their long years
of tapas.
In short, the sense objects can entrap only a mind that is
seduced with its own desires. The desireless man is a lion among
the elephants of sense objects, declares Sage Aṣṭāvakra, though
elephants are powerful creatures, they cannot encounter the king of
beasts and they take to their heels. Bhagavad-gītā declares the
same: ‘The objects of the senses turn away from the abstinent man
leaving the longing (behind); but his longing also turns away on
seeing the Supreme’21.
Here the sage adds one more thought. In case the sense objects
are unable to run away from the master, they surrender completely
to the will of the master and they seek to serve him as sycophants in
an imperial court of a tyrant king!
न  मु  का रकां  ध े  िनःश ो  यु मानसः।
प न ्    न ्    ृशन्  िज न्  अ न्  आ े  यथासुखम्॥४७॥
na mukti-kārikāṁ dhatte niḥśaṅko yukta-mānasaḥ,
paśyan śṛṇvan spṛśan jighranaśnanāste yathāsukham. (47)
न – not; मु  का रकाम् – practices of control as a means to Liberation;
ध े – adopts; िनःश ः  – free from doubts; यु मानसः – one whose
mind is identified with the Self; प न ्  – seeing;   न ्  – hearing;   ृशन्
– touching; िज न्  – smelling; अ न्  – eating; आ े – lives; यथा  सुखम्  –
happily
47. He who is free from doubts and has his mind identified
completely with the Self never resorts to the practices of control as a
means to Liberation. Seeing, hearing, touching, smelling and eating,
he lives happily.
One who has identified himself completely to the Self is an
awakened soul and in him there is no more any egocentric
individuality. Without ego and desires, actions in the world outside
are no more actions that can bind him with their vāsanā results. They
are no more actions; they are pseudo acts.
The Liberated in life is untainted, ever untouched by such natural
functions of sense organs as ‘seeing, hearing, touching, smelling
and eating’. They are the functions of the senses. The inert matter
composed sense organs are themselves acting only by drawing their
enlivening energy from the very Self, which is the nature of the Man
of Perfection. Such activities of the sense organs cannot affect him.
With the heat of the sun, water evaporates, forms into masses of
clouds and the clouds rain down. Can the rain ever wet the sun?
Can we say that the sun has created the rain? Yet, would there be
rain if the sun were not there? The Liberated sage is unaffected by
the normal activities of his sense organs. He is not in his body; his
mind is in him.
व  ु वणमा ेण  शु बु  िन राकु लः।
नैवाचारमनाचारमौदा ं  वा   प ित॥४८॥
vastu-śravaṇa-mātreṇa śuddha-buddhir-nirākulaḥ,
naivācāram-anācāram-audāsyaṁ vā prapaśyati. (48)
व  ु वणमा ेण  – by mere listening to the Real; शु बु  ः  – who has
attained pure intellect; िनराकु लः  – serene; न – not; एव – indeed;
आचारम्  – proper conduct; अनाचारम्  – improper conduct; औदा म्  –
indifference; वा – or;  प ित – sees
48. Having established in his pure intellect and having become
serene by mere listening to the Real, the wise one, no more sees
what is proper and improper action or even what is inaction.
By eliminating the desire and the ego, the intellect becomes calm
and serene and such a quietened bosom is considered, in the
spiritual literature of India, as the ‘pure intellect’ (śuddha buddhi).
One who has cultivated such a steady mind of continuous
equipoise, to him a mere listening to a Master’s discourse about the
Reality is sufficient to turn his entire mind in the direction pointed out
by the scriptures. Since the seeker has no desires in him, no ray of
his mind is entangled with the world of objects. With his entire mind
thus turned towards the higher Reality, he spontaneously awakes to
the Experience Transcendental. He becomes the Liberated in life.
Such a wise one thereafter knows not what is proper and
improper actions, not even what is inaction! He is no more the ‘doer’
or the ‘enjoyer’. His ego is dead. He no more does any activity. All
activities are taking place in him. The proper and improper actions of
his dream, are no more of any consequence! The Liberated, living in
the higher Consciousness, does not belong any longer to this world;
he is no more a native of our globe; he is just a sojourner here!
यदा  य त ु मायाित  तदा  त ु  ते  ऋजुः ।
शुभं  वा शुभं  वािप  त   चे ा  िह  बालवत्॥४९॥
yadā yatkartum-āyāti tadā tat-kurute ṛjuḥ,
śubhaṁ vāpyaśubhaṁ vāpi tasya ceṣṭā hi bālavat. (49)
यदा – when; यत्  – which; कतु म्  – to do (as his lot); आयाित – comes;
तदा – then; तत्  – that; कु  ते  – does; ऋजुः  – freely; शुभम् – good; वा
अिप – or; अशुभम्  – evil; वा – or; अिप – even; त   – his; चे ा – action;
िह – for; बालवत्  – like that of a child
49. The wise one does freely whatever comes to his lot, whether
good or evil; his actions are like those of a child.
The Man of Realisation lives in total freedom at all times, and under
all conditions and circumstances. He knows no limitations. He puts
no curb upon himself. He does not seek fields of activities. Whatever
circumstances reach him, he accepts it without any anxiety or
hesitation. He lives meeting his prārabdha openly, without any fear
or favour. Nothing affects him. Nothing entangles him. In no activity
does he entertain the idea that he is the ‘doer’.
‘The wise does freely’, meaning without the shackles of ego and
egocentric desires. He has neither the ego sense within nor has he
the ego feelings towards the world of objects; he has neither ‘I-ness’
nor ‘my-ness’. Whatever comes to him, good or evil, he meets them
heroically, seeing in and through them all, the same one, infinite Self.
The intellect – the equipment that discriminates the good and the evil
– has been transcended by him.
In this way, living moment-to-moment dynamically, facing life as it
comes, both in its raw beauty and naked abhorrence, the actions of
the wise are compared to the innocent actions of children. This
example has already been exhaustively analysed.
This verse apparently contradicts the thought expressed earlier:
‘He who has egoism in him acts even though he does not act. Surely
the wise one is free from egoism does not act even though he
acts.’22
 ात  ात्  सुखमा ोित   ात  ा भत े  परम्।
 ात  ाि वृ ितं  ग  े त्   ात  ात्  परमं  पदम्॥५०॥
svātantryāt sukham-āpnoti svātantryāllabhate param,
svātantryānnirvṛtiṁ gacchet svātantryāt paramaṁ padam. (50)
 ात  ात्  – from freedom; सुखम्  – happiness; आ ोित – attains;
 ात  ात्  – from freedom; लभते – attains; परम्  – the highest;  ात  ात्
ि  ि े
– from freedom; िनवृ ितम्  – repose; ग  े त्  – attains;  ात  ात्  – from
freedom; परमम्  – supreme; पदम्  – state (attains)
50. Through freedom one attains happiness; through freedom the
highest; through freedom to repose and through freedom to the
supreme state.
With a free and unshackled mind alone the spiritual awakening can
be accomplished. Any thought, good or bad, is ‘a stress in the
Infinite’. Without a disturbance the placid and clear surface of a lake
cannot have ripples. Any discipline, any value of life, even trying to
maintain the mind in meditation is a disturbance in the
Consciousness! Thoughtless state is the ‘no mind’; it is the state of
pure Consciousness, without any stress in It. With this idea in mind
Aṣṭāvakra addresses students, who have moved to the highest state
in meditation.
This does not mean that a fool, who lives a sensuous life of
indiscipline, is in any way reaching near the Truth. There are
unintelligent and unprepared students who vociferously declare such
a licentious life of freedom as a means for Realisation! They become
Mahaṛṣis and sages to spread such ideas among the innocent
masses of the world, they twist and pervert the already ugly face of
the community. They are a real peril to the society. We have
repeatedly warned, that this textbook is meant only for students, who
have risen above in their spiritual pursuit, after having undergone all
the unavoidable preliminary disciplines, which alone can bring about
inner purifications.
अकतृ  मभो  ृ  ं   ा नो  म ते  यदा।
तदा   ीणा  भव  ेव  सम ाि  वृ यः ॥५१॥
akartṛtvam-abhoktṛtvaṁ svātmano manyate yadā,
tadā kṣīṇā bhavantyeva samastāś-cittavṛttayaḥ. (51)
   ो
अकतृ  म्  – that one is not the doer; अभो ृ म्  – that one is not the
enjoyer;  ा नः  – of one’s own Self; म ते – perceives; यदा – when;
तदा – then;  ीणाः – destroyed; भव   – become; एव – indeed; सम ाः
– all; िच वृ यः  – modifications of the mind
51. All the modifications of the mind are indeed destroyed, when a
man realises that the Self in him, is neither the doer nor the enjoyer.
In the last stages of the spiritual practices, the attention is more and
more upon the Self, rather than upon the equipments of experiences
and their endless fields. To continuously contemplate upon the Self
as one’s own real nature and to meditate that as the Self, one is
neither the doer, nor the enjoyer, in any of the activities of one’s
body, mind and intellect – is to quieten the mind most effectively.
This attitude spells death to the ego.
This dwelling upon the Self and Its Nature Divine is also, no
doubt, ‘a thought’. There is newly risen ‘school of thought’ in India
led by a gang of incorrigibles, rather than by men of any spiritual
unfoldment. They have no knowledge of the Upaniṣads, nor have
they lived the spiritual life. They laugh at all spiritual practices, nay,
even at the attempt of the seeker to quieten his mind and compose
himself for contemplation upon the Self! Their arguments are quite
tantalising to any superficially intellectual man, indeed! But they are
certainly false prophets when judged from the state of Realisation.
The thought ‘I am the Self’ or the thought that ‘the infinite Self is
neither the doer nor the enjoyer’ is indeed a ‘thought’. But this
‘thought’ has a magic of its own and it annihilates all other thoughts
of the ego. It is the ego which arrogates to itself the false attitudes of
the doership and the enjoyership. This ‘thought’ when held on for a
sufficiently long time within the meditator, it shall not only destroy all
other thoughts but also disappear itself into the thoughtless state of
direct experience. This is not said by us for gaining an argument.
This is not something that the students of Vedānta should bitterly
swallow down their throats in a helpless blind faith! It is supremely
rational and entirely satisfying to any enquiring intellect.
‘Thought’ upon the Self, dear children, is not, in fact, a ‘thought’.
A thought must have necessarily an object. The thought of the Self is
a ‘thought’ on the subject and, therefore, it has no object. ‘Objectless
thought’ is not a thought. And yet, for the last withering mind,
contemplation upon the Self is an unavoidable staff, helping him
along the last few steps to the threshold of Reality.
When the sense of ‘doership’ and ‘enjoyership’ is completely
eradicated, the ego disappears into the vision of the Self. The
meditator merges in the meditated, the river has reached the ocean,
to be the ocean, no more can the river remain separate.
उ  ृ ङ् खला कृ ितका    थितध र   राजते।
न  तु  सं  ृहिच    शा  मू ढ   कृ ि मा॥५२॥
ucchṛṅkhalāpyakṛtikā sthitirdhīrasya rājate,
na tu saṁspṛha-cittasya śāntir-mūḍhasya kṛtrimā. (52)
उ  ृ ङ् खल – unrestricted; अिप – though; अकृ ितका – spontaneous
(natural);   थितः  – life; धीर  – of the wise; राजते – shines; न – not; तु –
but; सं  ृह - िच    – whose mind is attached; शा  ः  – calmness; मूढ 
– of the foolish, deluded person; कृ ि मा – artificial (unnatural)
52. The conduct of the wise one, which is unrestricted (by motive)
shines, being spontaneous, that is free from pretence; but not the
deliberate calmness of the foolish, whose mind is attached (in other
words full of desires).
The Liberated one has in him no more any urge to fulfil his
happiness through sense gratifications. He has no desires. He lives
a spontaneous and natural life, unrestricted and free, ever rooted in
the Experience Divine and, therefore, shines in the effulgence of his
inner peace and enlightenment.
Such a Man of Realisation is contrasted here with the ignorant
fool, whose mind is full of passions and desires, and yet, for a show,
he suppresses them all and externally exhibits a false attitude of an
artificial calmness! This deliberate and unnatural pose may deceive
the onlookers, but so far as the individual entity is concerned, he
cannot come to revel in the positive experience of the peaceful Self.
Pretences cannot lead us to the kingdom of the Self within.
Such false pretences become terrible millstones tied to weigh
down the neck of a seeker! No seeker should feel satisfied with such
pretences. True peace can come only in the direct experience of the
Self, reached through right knowledge, with which we end our stupid
ego.
िवलस    महाभोगैिव श    िग रग रान्।
िनर क ना  धीरा  अब ा  मु ब ु यः ॥५३॥
vilasanti mahābhogair-viśanti giri-gahvarān,
nirasta-kalpanā dhīrā abaddhā mukta-buddhayaḥ. (53)
िवलस   – sport (कदािचत्  – sometimes); महाभोगैः  – with great
enjoyments; िवश   – retire (कदािचत्  – sometimes); िग र  ग रान्  –
caves of mountains; िनर   क नाः – one who is free from mental
imagining; धीराः  – the wise one; अब ाः – unbound; मु ब ु यः  – of
liberated intellect
53. The wise, who are free from mental imagining, unbound and
liberated in intellect, sometimes sport in the midst of great
enjoyments and at other times retire to the mountain caves.
In the entire chapter Aṣṭāvakra was continuously singing the joys
and perfections experienced by the Liberated in life. Here he
explains how the Man of Realisation would live in this world and
what would be his reactions to the outer world.
Man of Perfection has eliminated his ego, has transcended his
intellect and mind and, therefore, has ended all his imaginings. His
mind is completely at rest because he has withdrawn from his mental
projections. His intellect is released from the shackles of the ego. He
is no more limited by desires. Thus his mind has scaled to its own
heights, through contemplation – a mind that is unbound and
unshackled by its usual restlessness.
With such a peaceful and conquered mind and intellect within,
the Man of Perfection lives in the world like an uncrowned king, a
sovereign of sovereigns. He sometimes sports with all enjoyments
and sometimes he is seen retired to the mountain retreats, on the
Ganga banks and there lives lost in samādhi.
It is immaterial to him where his body happens to be. Its
prārabdha may drag it into the world of sense objects. From the
ordinary viewpoint of the common man, a Man of Realisation may be
seen amidst luxurious environments, fascinatingly rich, and
surrounded by objects of pleasure. But since his inner equipments
are rendered impotent, and since his ego has been transcended, the
outer joys of the sense objects cannot add even a wee bit to the
infinite Bliss of the sage. The fields of sensuality never disturb him as
he has neither the sense of ‘doership’ nor ‘enjoyership’ in him.
At times he may be found completely retired from the fields of
activities and enjoyments, living in some silent cave in the
Himalayas, maintaining himself on fruits and roots, apparently lost in
total samādhi. This is from our frail viewpoint! Whether his body is
amidst sense objects, or in a solitary cave, it is immaterial to the
Liberated in life. He is ever the Self experiencing the infinite Bliss of
the Self, in the Self! To the awakened it does not matter if his
dreamworld is still continuing, and how his dream body is still
functioning in the presence of the other members of his past dream!
 ोि यं  देवतां  तीथ म नां  भूपितं  ि यम्।
   ा  स  ू   धीर   न  कािप   िद  वासना॥५४॥
śrotriyaṁ devatāṁ tīrtham-aṅganāṁ bhūpatiṁ priyam,
dṛṣṭvā sampūjya dhīrasya na kāpi hṛdi vāsanā. (54)
 ोि यम् – one versed in the Vedas; देवताम् – gods; तीथ म् – holy
places; अ नाम्  – woman; भूपितम् – king; ि यम्  – beloved one;    ा –
seeing; स  ू   – honouring; धीर  – of the wise one; न – not; का  अिप
– not a bit;  िद – in the heart; वासना – desire
54. Whether he is honouring a Vaidika scholar, the gods or the holy
places or seeing a woman, a king or a beloved one, not a bit of
desire ever springs in the heart of the wise one.
It is natural in India that we honour a learned scholar of the Vedas or
worship gods in the various fabulous temples of India or visit
enchanting and peaceful places of pilgrimage. None of these
activities can engender any desire in the Man of Perfection. Let him
see a beautiful woman, let him visit a mighty monarch, let him meet
a beloved one – none of these contacts can precipitate any desire in
him.
Transcending his own ego, he has come to experience the one
Self everywhere and thus, under all conditions, in all places, in every
contact, his attention is consistently engaged in experiencing the
infinite Bliss of the all-pervading Self. He becomes a man of ‘equal
vision’ (sama dṛṣṭi).
भृ  ैः  पु ैः  कल ै   दौिह ै ािप  गो जैः ।
िवह   िध  ृ तो  योगी  न  याित  िवकृ ितं  मनाक् ॥५५॥
bhṛtyaiḥ putraiḥ kalatraiśca dauhitraiścāpi gotrajaiḥ,
vihasya dhikkṛto yogī na yāti vikṛtiṁ manāk. (55)
भृ  ैः  – by servants; पु ैः  – by sons; कल ैः  – by wives; च – and; दौिह ैः
– by daughter’s sons; च – and; अिप  – also; गो जैः  – by relatives;
िवह  – ridiculing, scoffing; िध  ृ तः  – despised, abused; योगी – the
Realised one; न – not; याित – undergoes; िवकृ ितम् – perturbation;
मनाक्  – in the least
55. The Liberated is not at all perturbed even when scoffed and
abused by his servants, sons, wives, daughter's sons and other
relations.
Insults and abuses wound but the ego. To the wise one both praises
and abuses are sounds in the air expressing two different conditions
of the speaker's mind! A happy mind makes pleasant sounds, called
‘sweet words’ and an unhappy mind makes cruel noises, called
‘abuses’. Both are disturbances created in the atmosphere around
the speaker's mouth! The Liberated man is not at all affected by
them. Ordinarily the ego in us gets wounded by understanding the
significance of what the other says and then reacts and invariably
similar abuses disturb the same atmosphere, now springing from our
mouth!
Once, we are told, Bhagavān Buddha was abused and insulted in
the marketplace. Lord Buddha stopped and listened to all the abuses
but his serene smile never left his lips. When the market man was
tired and stopped making noises, Buddha majestically continued on
His way. Now a young disciple, who was with the Master at that time,
said, “Lord, give me the permission, I will go and show him. I will give
back to him! How dare he abuse my Master?” Then ever smiling
Buddha pitifully looked at the ignorant disciple and sweetly replied,
“Son, no doubt that man gave us a lot of abuses, but I did not
receive them! Therefore, I have nothing to give back to him! In case
you had received them, please go and give them back to him!!” This
is called the perfect ‘state of intellectual equanimity’ (sama buddhi).
The one who has realised the Self, sees nothing but the Self in
action everywhere. He has no ego in him and, therefore, he neither
likes nor hates; to him honour and dishonour are equal; he is neither
attached nor has he any aversion. Everywhere, at all times and in
everything, he watches and sees nothing but his own Self revelling in
Its peaceful effulgence.
स ु ोऽिप  न  स ु ः   ख ोिप  न  च   ख ते।
त ा य दशां  तां  तां  ता शा  एव  जानते॥५६॥
santuṣṭo'pi na santuṣṭaḥ khinnopi na ca khidyate,
tasyāścarya-daśāṁ tāṁ tāṁ tādṛśā eva jānate. (56)
स ु ः  – delighted; अिप – though; न – not; स ु ः  – delighted;  ख ः  –
afflicted; अिप – though; न – not; च – and;  ख ते – feels afflicted; त   –
his; आ य दशाम्  – stupendous state; तां  ताम्  – that and that; ता शाः  –
those like him; एव – alone; जानते – know
56. Though delighted, he is not delighted. Though afflicted, he is not
afflicted. Only those who are like him, understand this stupendous
state.
The one who lives in the Self, as the Self, has transcended his mind
and, therefore, if the mind is pleased, he is not pleased. It is the mind
that feels ‘afflicted’ and why should he feel afflicted? The mind, the
intellect and the body belong to us. We are their owners,
possessors, proprietors (svāmīs). If my buffalo gets dysentery, do I
run to the hospital? No doubt, the buffalo belongs to me! Possessor
is not the possessed. The joys and afflictions of my body, of my
intellect and of my mind cannot be joys and afflictions of me!
Wherever the sage be, under all conditions, he lives the
experience of the effulgent Self. He has become the Self. This
‘stupendous state’ (āścarya daśā) cannot be described in words or
communicated in any other way to the egocentric man. There is no
language by which it can be expressed.
Only on transcending the mind and intellect do we awaken to the
Self and the experience of the Self is not known at all by those who
are still in the web of the mind and intellect! Whatever the sage does
or does not, whatever we do or do not do to the sage, it is all the
same to the sage; for, to him there is only the infinite Consciousness
everywhere. How can the pleasures and sorrows of the dream affect
any more, the one who has awakened?
कत  त ैव  संसारो  न  तां  प     सूरयः।
शू ाकारा  िनराकारा  िनिव कारा  िनरामयाः॥५७॥
kartavyataiva saṁsāro na tāṁ paśyanti sūrayaḥ,
śūnyākārā nirākārā nirvikārā nirāmayāḥ. (57)
कत  ता – sense of duty; एव – indeed; संसारः  – mundane world; न –
not; ताम्  – that; प     – sees; सूरयः  – the wise; शू ाकाराः – of the
form of void (all-pervading); िनराकाराः – formless; िनिव काराः –
immutable; िनरामयाः  – untainted
57. The sense of duty, indeed, is the mundane world. This is not
acknowledged by the wise one, who has realised himself as the all-
pervading formless, immutable, untainted Self.
Of course I have a sacred duty to look after, protect, serve and help
my wife and children and also my community that I see around me in
my dream!
The dreamer I while dreaming believes that the dream world is
real. In this sense of reality, are born all my duties and
responsibilities. When I have awakened to the waker I, what duties
are there towards my dream family and dream community? The wise
one, Liberated in life, is the awakened one. He has ‘awakened’ to the
infinite Consciousness. He cannot be touched by the laws of duties
and responsibilities projected and maintained by the mind in
disturbance. No sense of duty can arise without attachments;
attachments cannot be unless we permit a sense of reality to the
world of plurality. To the awakened, the illusory world of objects and
beings are no more and, therefore, he, living as the ‘all-pervading,
formless, immutable and untainted’ Self, has no more sense of duty
towards anyone.
अकु व  िप  सं ोभात्    ः  सव    मूढधीः।
कु व  िप  तु  कृ  ािन  कु शलो  िह  िनराकु लः॥५८॥
akurvannapi saṁkṣobhāt vyagraḥ sarvatra mūḍhadhīḥ,
kurvannapi tu kṛtyāni kuśalo hi nirākulaḥ. (58)
अकु व न्  – without doing anything, in inaction; अिप – even; सं ोभात्  –
owing to commotion within;   ः  – agitated; सव   –at all times; मूढधीः
– one of dull intellect; कु व न्  – performing; अिप – even; तु – but; कृ  ािन
– duties; कु शलः  – the adept (wise); िह – indeed; िनराकु लः  –
unperturbed
58. The fool, even in ‘inaction’, is ever agitated by his commotion
within. But the adept (wise) even when performing his duties, indeed,
is unperturbed.
Although in the previous verse it has been said that the Man of
Perfection has no more duties to perform, it does not mean that a
perfect Master will remain in life as a log of wood!! He serves the
society in his own way, with utter freedom of his own personality. The
difference between the activities of a Man of Perfection and an
imperfect ego, is in the conditions of their minds. The bosom of a
fool, even while sitting apparently at rest in his meditation seat, is in
storms with the passion prompted commotions! His ego bleeds with
its imaginations!
A sage ever calm and serene within, with his ego sublimated, his
mind revelling in the Self, undertakes mighty human programmes of
moral rehabilitation of the entire humanity. Mighty programmes are
launched and they guide and lead such programmes as though it is
an entertaining game and engaging sport, a mighty relaxation, a
glorious holiday! In the serenity of their minds they generate a
mightier dynamism and thus, their actions become almost
superhuman, materially beneficial, morally spectacular, spiritually a
blessing!!
Bhagavad-gītā underscores this idea, when Kṛṣṇa laughs at
Arjuna's pseudo religion which makes him declare his unwillingness
to enter the field of activity. In the crisp statement of māntrika beauty
Kṛṣṇa summarises his entire philosophy when he says: ‘Equanimity
within is spiritual life’23.
The Lord of the Bhagavad-gītā emphasises this idea, again,
almost in the same breath, when He declares: ‘Efficiency and
dexterity in action is spiritual life’24.
सुखमा े  सुखं  शेते  सुखमायाित  याित  च।
सुखं  व    सुखं  भुङ्   े   वहारेऽिप  शा धीः॥५९॥
sukham-āste sukhaṁ śete sukham-āyāti yāti ca,
sukhaṁ vakti sukhaṁ bhuṅkte vyavahāre'pi śāntadhīḥ. (59)
सुखम्  – happily; आ े – sits; सुखम्  – happily; शेते – sleeps; सुखम्  –
happily; आयाित – comes; याित – goes; च – and; सुखम्  – happily; व  
– speaks; सुखम्  – happily; भुङ्   े – eats (enjoys);  वहारे – in
practical affairs of life; अिप – even; शा धीः  – of peaceful mind (the
wise one)
59. Even in practical affairs of life, the wise one, of peaceful mind,
sits happily, sleeps happily, moves happily, speaks happily and eats
happily.
To the saint the distinction between the inner Experience Divine and
the outer worldly experiences merge in the all comprehensive infinite
of the experienced Self. He is ever peaceful in his mind and no
disturbance ever reaches his bosom, because everywhere he
recognises but the play of the one Self. Thus he is even minded
towards all and things beings and his equanimity cannot be
disturbed whatever be the circumstances.
The vāsanā inflicted sense of separative ego (jīva) in us is that
which brings about all sense of conflicts in life. One who has risen
above the ego has awakened to the aloneness of the Self, wherein
there is no distinction at all between subject and object.
The outer world of multiplicity, no doubt, apparently looks totally
different from the subjective entity in the observer. Ordinarily we
consider these two factors as completely different from each other. In
this unholy divorce between the subject and the object, we create for
ourselves our conflicts within and the world outside becomes for us a
field of incorrigible challenges.
The face of a cow looks, certainly, different from the view of the
same cow from its hind part. Because a cow looks different from the
front and from the back, no sane one would say that the same cow is
two different animals!! We cannot separate the front part of the cow
from its hind part without destroying the cow! The subject and object
are two aspects of the one Reality, which the Liberated in life, is
continuously experiencing. Hence their minds are ever peaceful
(śānta dhīḥ).
Having experienced this one universal Reality, thereafter, without
ego and egocentric desires, they allow themselves to come in
contact with the world outside at all levels, ever happy, under all
circumstances! ‘The wise one sits happily, sleeps happily, moves
happily, speaks happily and eats happily’. Says Bhagavad-gītā: ‘He
enjoys whatever that comes to him unasked’25.
 भावा    नैवाित ल कवद्   वहा रणः।
महा द  इवा ो ो  गत  ेशः  सुशोभते॥६०॥
svabhāvād-yasya naivārtir-lokavad vyavahāriṇaḥ,
mahāhrada ivākṣobhyo gatakleśaḥ suśobhate. (60)
 ि  
 भावात्  एव – by his inner disposition; य   – whose; न – not; आित ः  –
distress; लोकवत्  – like ordinary people;  वहा रणः  – acting; महा द –
vast lake; इव – like; अ ो ः  – unagitated; गत  ेशः  – with sorrows
extinguished; सुशोभते – shines
60. One who, due to his inner disposition even when engaged in
practical affairs of life, does not have any distress, like ordinary
people have; he remains unagitated like a vast lake, with all his
sorrows extinguished, he indeed, shines.
The lakes of our minds are disturbed with thought ripples mainly
from two sources. The outer objects can enter our bosom through
our sense openings and create disturbances therein. Again, even in
the absence of outer objects of temptations, the inner mind, through
its own stored up memories of past experiences and its fresh
imaginations of future indulgences, can create storms within all by
itself! In the case of one who has conquered himself and reached the
state of Self-realisation, in him the ego and egocentric desires are
completely absent and, therefore, neither the outer world nor his own
subjective mind, can bring about any disturbances at all into the
serene lake of his mind.
Such a Master has already transcended his mind-intellect
equipment. He directly experiences the tranquil Self at all times,
under all circumstances. He has become an ‘Ᾱtmārāma’. His mental
disposition, thereafter, is to recognise and experience the Self
everywhere. Hence he is ever unagitated. Even when he is engaged
in the practical affairs of life, he is not disturbed at all in his constant
experience of the life. Neither desires, nor ego, ever rises in his mind
to disturb his bosom. He shines. with the glory of the divine Self in
him!
िनवृ ि रिप  मूढ    वृि  पजायते।
 वृि रिप  धीर   िनवृि फलभािगनी॥६१॥
nirvṛttir-api mūḍhasya pravṛttir-upajāyate,
pravṛttir-api dhīrasya nivṛtti-phala-bhāginī. (61)
िनवृ ि ः  – withdrawal; अिप – even; मूढ   – of the fool;  वृि ः  – action;
उपजायते – becomes;  वृि ः  – action; अिप – even; धीर  – of the wise
one; िनवृि फलभािगनी – shares the fruits of withdrawal (inaction)
61. With the fool, even withdrawal (inaction) becomes action. With
the wise, even action results in the fruit of withdrawal (inaction).
Action and inaction – the dynamic life of acquisition of wealth and the
passive life of renunciation of objects – both depend not merely upon
the physical movements of the limbs or their indolent rest. They both
depend upon the presence or the absence of ego and its desires. It
is the sense of ‘doership’ and ‘enjoyership’ that makes actions full of
agitations and restlessness. Once these false concepts are
removed, the Man of Wisdom, transcending his ego and egocentric
desires, inspiredly works. Such spontaneous activities can provide
for the wiseman the rewards of total renunciation and complete
retirement. Self-withdrawal (nivṛtti) brings serenity of the mind; it is
the outgoing tendencies of the mind (pravṛtti) that breeds its
restlessness.
A fool, who is egocentric, even when he is withdrawing himself
from all activities, in his quiet hut of meditation on the Ganga banks,
feels mentally restless and unhappy. The Liberated in life even when
he is in the midst of activities, serving the world and its humanity, is
ever serene and happy, nothing disturbs him, because he acts in the
world from his seat in the Self!
प र हेषु  वैरा ं   ायो  मूढ     त े।
देहे  िवगिलताश      रागः     िवरागता॥६२॥
parigraheṣu vairāgyaṁ prāyo mūḍhasya dṛśyate,
dehe vigalitāśasya kva rāgaḥ kva virāgatā. (62)
   े ै
प र हेषु – in possessions; वैरा म्  – aversion;  ायः  – often; मूढ   – of
the fool;   त े – is seen; देहे – in body; िवगिलतआश  – of one whose
attachment has vanished;    – where; रागः  – attachment;    – where;
िवरागता – aversion
62. The fool often shows aversion to his possessions. Where is
attachment and where is aversion for him whose love for the body
has vanished?
An ordinary man would like to get away from his field of activities and
conflicts, if not every weekend, at least once a year on a long
vacation. He gets tired of the struggles of acquisition; he gets
exhausted by the continuous indulgence. Even in his moment-to-
moment enjoyments also, say after eating two or three bars of
chocolates, he shows aversion to eating more. This ‘desirelessness’
(vairāgya) for the chocolate is after all a temporary phase and by
evening he would like to have another bar; certainly by tomorrow, he
will anxiously seek some chocolates for himself!
As long as we are identified with our physical body, we cannot
really grow ‘desireless’ towards objects that are conducive for the
happiness of our physical body. This body consciousness cultivates
in us tremendous attachments, endless desires, vulgar passions and
incorrigible lusts. Temporary ‘aversion and desirelessness’ (vairāgya)
is of no avail in the spiritual world.
As a contrast to such a foolish man, Aṣṭāvakra describes the
attitude of the Liberated in life. His entire love for the body has
vanished. To him the body has become a dry leaf that has fallen
away from him! To him, thereafter, there is neither attachment (rāga)
nor lust for the objects of the world nor has he any ‘aversion nor
desirelessness’ (vairāgya). He has neither rāga nor vairāgya. He
rises above both of these attitudes of the mind. He has no
identification with the body and, therefore, he is not aware of the
objects of pleasures at all.
 ि    
भावनाभावनास ा   ि मू ढ   सव दा।
भा भावनया  सा  तु    थ ा ि  िपणी॥६३॥
bhāvanābhāvanāsaktā dṛṣṭir-mūḍhasya sarvadā,
bhāvya-bhāvanayā sā tu svasthasyādṛṣṭi-rūpiṇī. (63)
भावना  अभावना  आस ा – attached to ideation (thinking) and non-
ideation (non-thinking);  ि ः  – view; मूढ   – of the fool or deluded
one; सव दा – always; भा   भावनया – engaged in ideation of objects; सा
– that; तु – but;   थ   – of the one established in the Self; अ ि 
 िपणी – of the nature of non-ideation
63. The view of the fool is always attached to ideation and non-
ideation. But the view of one established in the Self, though engaged
in the ideation of objects, is of the nature of non-ideation.
It is the seeker, who is yet ignorant of the supreme experience, that
must have the discipline of maintaining noble and divine thoughts in
the mind and must learn to eliminate all negative, agitation producing
thoughts of passions and lusts. It is an early seeker, who must
withdraw his mind from the contemplation of body, mind and intellect
and turn his thoughts into a steady meditation upon the nature of the
Self. The seeker strives to reach a state of non-ideation by
regulating, controlling and ending ultimately all his voluntary and
involuntary ideations.
One who is established in the experience of the Self, to him even
while ‘he is engaged in ideation of objects’ even while thoughts are
running fast and vigorous in his mind, he is enjoying the ‘state of
non-ideation’ the state of thoughtlessness!
It is not a question of whether there are thoughts in the mind or
not; the question is, whether we are ourselves identified with the
thoughts in the mind. The sage is one who has withdrawn his
identifications and, therefore, the existence or non-existence of the
thoughts is of no consequence to him! So long as I am standing on
the beach, how can the waves of the ocean ever affect me?
We play the part of a fool not because the thoughts are rising in
our minds but because we identify with them so much that we totally
come to forget the source from which the thought ripples have risen
up. The Man of Realisation is one, who even while observing the
noisy thought waves rising in his mind, is never totally unconscious
of the ‘source’ from which they arise. From the infinite
Consciousness, due to desire stresses, thoughts ‘wave up’; these
very thoughts are nothing but Consciousness expressed at the
mental level. Hence Aṣṭāvakra points out that even during ideations,
when once he is established in the Self, he is ever in a ‘state of non-
ideation’.
सवा र  ेषु  िन ामो  य रेद्  बालव ुिनः।
न  लेप    शु    ि यमाणेऽिप  कम िण॥६४॥
sarvārambheṣu niṣkāmo yaścared bālavan-muniḥ,
na lepastasya śuddhasya kriyamāṇe'pi karmaṇi. (64)
सव आर ेषु – in all undertakings or actions; िन ामः  – without desire
or motive, unattached; (सन्  – being); यः  मुिनः  – the wise one who; चरेत्
– moves; बालवत्  – like a child; न – not; लेपः  – attachment,
involvement; त   – of whom; शु    – pure; ि यमाणे – which is being
done; अिप – even; कम िण  – actions; (भवित – is)
64. The wise one, who has no motive in any of (all) his actions,
moves like a child and is pure, has no attachments even in the action
that is being done by him.
One in whom the ego is no more, that individual cannot have the
sense of ‘doership’. A child is not accused when a disastrous tragedy
is ultimately caused by the innocent activities of a child. There are
instances where a child playing with a loaded gun has killed one of
its parents! Here the child is not accused of murder, because its
action is not motivated. The sage is one in whom there is neither an
ego nor any selfish desire. Therefore his actions are considered as
always innocent. Hence a sage in action is readily compared here
with a child at play.
It is the ego and its selfish motives that entangle us in the world
outside. These unhealthy involvements breed all the sorrows in
every field of activity. A Man of Realisation acts inspiredly in any field
of endeavour, that comes to him as his lot, without ever getting
himself shackled by the duties attached to it. To him, all activities
become an engaging sport – a joyous relaxation – an entertaining
play.
This expressive phrase sarvārambha reminds us of its affective
use in the Bhagavad-gītā: ‘Renouncing all undertakings (or
commencements), he who is (thus) devoted to Me, is dear to Me’26.
According to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the idea is not that the Man of
Perfection will not undertake any work, but in all undertakings he has
no vanity of ‘doership’. Hence a man of devotion and knowledge is
described by the Lord, ‘As one who has renounced completely all
undertakings’ (sarva-ārambha parityāgī).
स  एव  ध   आ  ः  सव भावेषु  यः  समः।
प न ्    न ्    ृशन्  िज   ि  ष मानसः॥६५॥
sa eva dhanya ātmajñaḥ sarvabhāveṣu yaḥ samaḥ,
paśyan śṛṇvan spṛśan jighran-aśnan-nistarṣa-mānasaḥ. (65)
स – that; एव – indeed; ध ः  – blessed; आ  ः  – knower of the Self;
सव भावेषु – in all conditions; यः  – who; समः  – the same; प न ्  – seeing;
  न ् – hearing;   ृशन्  – touching; िज न्  – smelling; अ न्  – eating;
िन ष मानसः  – whose mind is free from thirst (desire)
65. Blessed indeed is that knower of the Self, who, with his mind free
from thirst, even though seeing, hearing, touching, smelling or
eating, remains the same under all conditions.
In the fields of activities it is inconceivable for us how an individual
can continuously maintain his equanimity without being troubled by
the endless tossings that the world should necessarily provide even
to a Man of Wisdom. Here, Aṣṭāvakra, explains the secret by which
the Man of Perfection maintains his unbroken serenity under all
conditions, in the outer world.
The secret lies in the special orientation that he has brought
about in his mental field. He has removed from his mind, all thirst –
all its craving – for sense gratifications. Once the mind is
dehypnotised of its hunger to seek fulfilment in sense objects, that
dispassionate mind becomes completely neutral to the empty
charms in the world of happenings around him. Not that the Man of
Realisation runs away from the world of sense objects. He lives fully,
freely.
The world around us is a gift of the Lord. Our delicate sense
organs are a grace of the Almighty. A Man of Realisation would not
dare to insult the Lord of the universe either by destroying the
instruments of perception or by rejecting the sense objects. ‘Seeing,
hearing, touching, smelling, and eating’, he shows his gratitude to
the Creator of the universe, and honours Him by accepting His
invitations to this feast of delusion, in his stupendous fairs of illusion!
He is a free soul, free to live in the world, absolutely uninhibited,
without tensions and conflicts, apparently indulging. But the world of
sense objects cannot entangle him. He sees the world as great
entertainment by a fabulous magician! Even while looking at them,
he perceives but the supreme Reality behind. He lives life in a
ceaseless mood of breathless wonderments, but never, ever a victim
of its hallucinations!

   संसारः     चाभासः     सा ं     च  साधनम्।
आकाश ेव  धीर   िनिव क    सव दा॥६६॥
kva saṁsāraḥ kva cābhāsaḥ kva sādhyaṁ kva ca sādhanam,
ākāśasyeva dhīrasya nirvikalpasya sarvadā. (66)
   – where; संसारः  – world;    – where; च – indeed; आभासः  – ego
(appearance);    – where; सा म् – end (goal, meaning Liberation);  
– where; च  – and; साधनम्  – means (path, meaning spiritual
practices); आकाश   एव – like the universal space; धीर  – of the
wise one; िनिव क    – changeless; सव दा – always
66. Where is the world and where is the ego, where is the end and
where are the means for the wise one, who is ever changeless like
the universal space?
We must here, again repeat the warning that we have been giving all
through this text. Early seekers should not quote these verses and
on their basis drop their practices! These are intended for the one
who has already achieved his goal, who has fulfilled his life, who has
awakened to the pure infinite Self. These verses are not addressed
to the early seekers. These are addressed to a Janaka-like student,
who is on the outermost verges of the finitude, yet hesitating to step
into the realm of the Infinite.
To the Man of Perfection, who has already realised the Self, there
is for him nothing but the Self. To him there is no world of objects,
nor is there in him an experiencer of the world, the ego. He has
already achieved the goal and, therefore, he has no more goal to
gain, no more an end to achieve. What ‘path’ should he follow, or
what ‘means’ must he adopt? And for what? The Man of Realisation
is ever in the Infinite, wherein he has become changeless, all-
pervading like the universal space. He has ended all his limitations.
The pot has broken and the pot space has become one with the
eternal universal space!
The wave has merged in the ocean. The pot has been crushed
and has become the mud. The dreamer has awakened.
The Liberated in life is the supreme Self in action.
Manhood has ended in sheer Godhood.
स  जय थ सं ासी  पूण  रसिव हः।
अकृ ि मोऽनव   े  समािधय    वत ते॥६७॥
sa jayatyartha-sannyāsī pūrṇa-svarasa-vigrahaḥ,
akṛtrimo'navacchinne samādhiryasya vartate. (67)
सः – he; जयित  – cry hallelujah; अथ सं ासी – who has renounced all
desires; पूण  रसिव हः  – who is the perfect embodiment of all Bliss,
which is his own nature; अकृ ि मः  – spontaneous; अनव   े – in the
unlimited; समािधः  – absorption; य   – whose; वत ते – is
67. Hallelujah to him who has renounced all desires, who is the
embodiment of perfect Bliss, which is his own nature and who is
spontaneously absorbed in the unlimited space.
Even the serene tranquillity of the revered Sage Aṣṭāvakra seems to
heave up into emotions of adoration and love. To that individual man,
who has successfully broken the shackles of his delusion and has
merged to be the infinite Self, he cries jaya-jaya! hallelujah! to the
victorious person who has freed himself from his ego shackles, to
experience his immutable, divine glory, as the boundless substratum
for the whole universe!
The Liberated in life having renounced all the desires in him has
now come to experience himself as the ‘embodiment of perfect Bliss
which is his own nature’ (pūrṇa svarasa vigrahaḥ). Here this term
used by Aṣṭāvakra is one of the precious gem like phrases that has
unconsciously, crystallised in the sage’s mind during his
contemplation upon the theme of his glorious song. Many such
enchanting phrases of fabulous significance have been minted and
sent out into circulation by the sage in this Saṁhitā. The phrase
evidently screams the advaitika realisation, wherein the meditator is
not separate from the meditated, wherein the subject has merged in
the object of contemplation, wherein the river has reached the
ocean!
This merger of the individuality with the universal Reality is
effortless – is spontaneous. This great awakening into the spiritual
experience is automatic and natural. There is no strain or struggle in
it. All efforts are in ending the ego, in weaning the mind away from its
fascination for sense objects. Śaṅkara expresses the spontaneity
and effortlessness of the final stage of Self-realisation in his
Vivekacūḍāmaṇi: ‘The clear knowledge ‘I am Devadatta’ is
independent of everything; similar is the case with the realisation in
the knower of Brahman that ‘I am Brahman’.’27
ब ना   िकमु  ेन   ातत ो  महाशयः।
भोगमो िनराका ी  सदा  सव    नीरसः॥६८॥
bahunātra kim-uktena jñāta-tattvo mahāśayaḥ,
bhoga-mokṣa-nirākāṅkṣī sadā sarvatra nīrasaḥ. (68)
ब ना – much; अ  – here; िकम्  – what use; उ  ेेन – by saying;  ातत ः
– who has realised the Truth; महाशयः  – the great souled one;
भोगमो िनराका ी – free from the desire of enjoyment and Liberation;
सदा – at all times; सव   – in all places; नीरसः  – devoid of passions (is)
68. In short, here there is no need to say more. The great souled
one, who has realised the Truth, is free from desire for sense
enjoyments and for spiritual Liberation. He is devoid of all passions,
in all places, and at all times.
On summarising what has been said so far, in this chapter, the sage
is evidently feeling that he has not completely expressed what he
wants. In this verse he is, in a way, summarising his thoughts. All
great Masters have followed this very same method. Even the Vedas
despair in her inability to communicate the state of perfection and
she has to satisfy herself by merely indicating the goal which is
beyond all expressions.
‘In short, here there is no need to say more’ meaning, that for
those who have purified their inner equipment, what has been said
so far is more than sufficient. And to others, any amount of such
discussions will not bring even a glimmer of understanding. The
great Teacher means that if Janaka has been restless enough in his
mind and thus has not realised the Self even after listening to what
has been said so far, then it is useless for the Master to keep on
disturbing the student’s mind!
This is not an expression of the Teacher's despair at the brilliant
student Janaka, but an open confession that language is utterly
incompetent to communicate this Knowledge. The intellect of the
listener is no vessel to receive what the Teacher wants to give. The
student has to transcend his individuality, and come to be awake to
the state of pure Consciousness, all by himself.
In this great flight across the frontiers of the limited, the meditator
is not allowed to smuggle anything through the barriers of
Consciousness. Even the noblest aspirations have to be renounced.
All mantras and prayers, all devotions and yoga, all meditations and
even ‘the anxiety to realise the Truth’ (mumukṣutva), is not allowed
to be smuggled into the supreme state of Consciousness.
The Liberated in life is free from desires – both for the sense
enjoyments and for spiritual Liberation. He is indeed devoid of all
passions at all times, under all circumstances. Passions and desires
are the attributes of the ego. One who has transcended the mind and
intellect (mahāśayaḥ), to him where are these outgoing tendencies,
which are essentially of the nature of the mind? He has already
transcended his mind!
महदािद  जग ् वैतं  नाममा िवजृ  तम्।
िवहाय  शु बोध   िकं  कृ  मविश ते॥६९॥
mahadādi jagad-dvaitaṁ nāma-mātravijṛmbhitam,
vihāya śuddhabodhasya kiṁ kṛtyam-avaśiṣyate. (69)
महदािद – beginning with mahat (total intellect); जगद्   ैतम्  – the
pluralistic world; नाम  मा   िवजृ   तम्  – manifested merely by name;
िवहाय – renouncing; शु बोध   – of one who is pure Consciousness;
िकम्  – what; कृ  म्  – to be done; अविश ते – remains
69. What remains to be done by one who is pure Consciousness?
He has renounced the pluralistic world, which begins with mahat
(total intellect) and is manifested merely by names.
The entire phenomenal world of plurality is the expression of the
‘macrocosmic intellect’ indicated in the Sāṅkhya philosophy as
mahat. According to them prakṛti is the material cause from which
evolves the mahat. From mahat in logical steps evolves the sense of
ego (ahaṅkāra), mind (mana), the five organs of perception (jñāna
indriyas) and the five organs of action (karma indriyas), the five
‘subtle’ elements (tanmātrās), the five ‘gross’ elements
(mahābhūtas), by the combinations of which, in different proportions,
the world of plurality manifests. When out of gold, the goldsmith
beats out a bar, pulls wires, cuts it into bits, hammers them into tiny
rings and makes them into a chain, the ornament so made is to be
nothing but gold! The bar, the wire, the bits, the rings and the chain
are all merely ‘names’; they are all, in essence, nothing but gold
itself. Phenomenal world of plurality is nothing but the expressions of
the prakṛti – all the rest is nothing but mere distinctions in names.
It is the ‘ego’ in us, the subject, that experiences, through the
mind and the sense organs, the perceptions of the world of
multiplicity expressed as objects, emotions and thoughts. The
Liberated in life is one who has transcended his ego and has
awakened to the infinitude of the Self. From this standpoint
therefore, where is the world for him? Then what duties can bind him
to the world? There is nothing to be done by him, there is nothing for
him to achieve!
In this supreme state of fulfilment experienced, as the Self, when
he has already done all that is to be done, the Man of Perfection has
nothing more to achieve in the world of names and forms. Even
though it was the very day that my daughter was to be given away in
marriage, if I wake up, have I any more duties towards my daughter
and the arrangements already made for her marriage in my last
night's dream? What duty have I towards my dream family?
The verse does not mean that there is no duty for a sādhaka
towards the world around him. This is meant for those who are no
more seeing the phenomenal world, those who are revelling in the
experience of the Self.
In this context, we are reminded of the famous description of
Mahopaniṣad wherein the ṛṣi explains to us how such a Man of
Wisdom views the phenomenal world: ‘Just as the villagers watch a
team of tourists passing through the village street so does the wise
man watch the daily parade of the world in front of him!’28
The villagers, certainly, see the pilgrims (or the tourists) who are
passing through the village, but the residents of the village are not at
all affected by what they see, except that they are entertained by the
crowd that is passing by!! The Liberated in life with perfect
detachment watches the parade of the world that marches in front of
his awareness!!
 ि   ि ि ीि ि ी
 मभूतिमदं  सव   िकि  ा ीित  िन यी।
अल   ु रणः  शु ः   भावेनैव  शा ित॥७०॥
bhrama-bhūtam-idaṁ sarvaṁ kiñcin-nāstīti niścayī,
alakṣya-sphuraṇaḥ śuddhaḥ svabhāvenaiva śāmyati. (70)
 मभूतम्  – produced by illusion; इदम् – this; सव म्  – all; िकि त्  –
anything; न – not; अ   – exists; इित – thus; िन यी – knowing with
certitude; अल   ु रणः  – to whom the imperceptible is revealed; शु ः
– the pure one;  भावेन्  – naturally; एव – indeed; शा ित – becomes
tranquil
70. The pure one knows with certitude that this universe is the
product of illusion and that nothing really exists. The imperceptible
Self is revealed to him and he, naturally, becomes tranquil.
After the direct experience of the Self, there cannot be even a trace
of doubt, because he has actually woken up. Such a wise man
continuously experiences the effulgent Self.
Here, the experience does not mean that the Self is an ‘object’ of
the experiences. The infinite Consciousness is the absolute Subject.
It can never be an object. Objects can only be perceived by the
body, mind or the intellect. Aṣṭāvakra in order to point out that the
Self is the final and only Subject, uses the adjective ‘The
imperishable Self’. The knowledge of the Self is not emerging out of
the activities of the sense organs, mind or the intellect. In Self-
realisation, the process is unique inasmuch as it is gained when ‘the
ego disappears into the vision of the Reality’.
With this realisation the individual becomes pure, completely free
from his ignorance of Reality. It is this ‘ignorance’ that precipitates
the inner equipments and the ego. It is the ego that crystallises the
required physical body and projects the appropriate world of objects
through its imaginations in order to experience among them its
chosen joys and sorrows! The Self-realised sage is one who has
ended the ‘non-apprehension of Reality’ (ignorance) in the direct
experience of the ‘Imperceptible’.
Aṣṭāvakra concludes ‘naturally he becomes tranquil’. In the Self,
revelling as the Self, what disturbance can reach the Divine? All
disturbances arise from either the body or the mind or the intellect;
transcending these equipments the sage revels in the blissful Self.
शु   ु रण प     भावमप तः ।
   िविधः     च  वैरा ं      ागः     शमोऽिप  वा॥७१॥
śuddha-sphuraṇa-rūpasya dṛśya-bhāvam-apaśyataḥ,
kva vidhiḥ kva ca vairāgyaṁ kva tyāgaḥ kva śamo'pi vā. (71)
शु   ु रण प   – of the nature of pure effulgence;     भावम् – the
phenomenal world; अप तः  – not seeing;    – where; िविधः – the
rules of life (conduct);    – where; च – and; वैरा म् – dispassion;    –
where;  ागः  – renunciation, relinquishment;    – where; शमः  –
control of the mind; अिप – also; वा – or
71. Rules of life, dispassion, relinquishment, control of the mind –
what are all these to one who is of the nature of pure effulgence and
who does not perceive the phenomenal world at all.
Medicines, strict diet, confinement to bed, a nurse to attend, bedpan
in the bed – what are these for one who has come out of the hospital
and is living a normal healthy, social life? The limited ego, suffering
from its ‘ignorance’ entangled by the fascination of the world around
him, chained and shackled by his emotions and passions, tossed
about by his own mental agitations – to such a suffering egocentric
man, in his delirium, the Upaniṣads prescribe retirement, quietude,
contemplation, self-control and rules of righteous conduct and the
disciplines of moral and ethical living.
But to one who has awakened to the nature of the pure infinite
Consciousness, wherein he, as the Self, cannot perceive any world
of phenomena, to such a Man of Realisation there cannot be any
rules of conduct. His actions are spontaneous and divine and they
are what constitute the very ‘standard’ which are declared by the
scriptures of the world as dharma or righteousness. His conduct is
dharma; he is not following dharma. Men of Realisation prescribe
dharma with their life, by their conduct; we, seekers of perfection
must implicity abide and follow the pattern of life and the standard of
living that such Masters have demonstrated in their lives.
Aṣṭāvakra is dissecting the nature of the Man of Perfection, for
the education of a brilliant spiritual student, who is on the seat of his
meditation – the royal Saint Janaka. To misunderstand its import and
to wrongly apply this verse in life would be suicidal to the spiritual life
of any seeker. You are warned!!
  ु रतोऽन  पेण   कृ ितं  च  न  प तः ।
   ब ः     च  वा  मो ः     हष ः     िवषािदता॥७२॥
sphurato'nanta-rūpeṇa prakṛtiṁ ca na paśyataḥ,
kva bandhaḥ kva ca vā mokṣaḥ kva harṣaḥ kva viṣāditā. (72)
  ु रतः  – shining; अन  पेण – in endless forms;  कृ ितम् – nature
(relative existence ); च – and; न प तः  – one who is not seeing the
pluralistic world;    – where; ब ः  – bondage;    – where; च – and; वा
– or; मो ः  – Liberation;    – where; हष ः  – joy;    – where; िवषािदता –
sorrow
72. Where is bondage? Where is Liberation? Where is joy? Where is
sorrow? for one who does not perceive nature – the relative
existence – but sees only the Self shining in endless forms.
The individualised subjective ego (jīva) looking out, through its
vāsanā layers, sees the delusory world of names and forms and
deliberately divides the world as things that it likes and things that it
dislikes. To this deluded ego, there is nothing but the world of names
and forms, which is real, substantial, true. To the ego there is nothing
greater, nobler, diviner, more eternal. As a limited self, certainly, the
ego comes to feel its sense of limitation, and therefore, it complains
of its bondages. It is the ego that grows anxious to liberate itself from
the entanglements of its own sorrows! The ego, in its identification
with the body, is happy or unhappy and it suffers in a self-created life
of joy and sorrow.
The sage who has risen above the ego and has, therefore,
transcended his intellect and awakened to the Self, from his divine
state, sees no plurality at all. He is the one, who is Liberated in life.
Such a sage, even when his mind interprets to him the phenomenal
world of names and forms, from his deep inner experience, realises
that the apparent illusion of plurality in front of him, are all nothing
but the Consciousness Itself playing in different forms.
To the one who has the knowledge of the nature of the ocean,
can the waves and the bubbles be separate from the ocean? To the
one who has the wisdom of gold, can the gold ornaments,
irrespective of its shape and beauty, be anything really different from
gold? On awakening from the dream, could the dream that we saw
before, be anything different from our own mind? To the awakened
Man of Perfection even when he views the world of plurality, can he
ever forget the essential Truth, that shimmers in and through the
names and forms?
Joys and sorrows are the ultimate result of ‘ignorance’. On the
‘non-apprehension of Reality’ we take the ‘mis- apprehensions’ to be
real and in this lies the essence of bondage. Says Śaṅkara in the
Vivekacūḍāmaṇi: ‘To identify the Self with the not-self is the bondage
of man’29 .
     े ि  े
बु  पय  संसारे  मायामा ं  िववत ते।
िनम मो  िनरह ारो  िन ामः  शोभते  बुधः॥७३॥
buddhiparyanta-saṁsāre māyāmātraṁ vivartate,
nirmamo nirahaṅkāro niṣkāmaḥ śobhate budhaḥ. (73)
बु  पय  संसारे – in the phenomenal world, which lasts until Self-
knowledge; मायामा म् – mere illusion; िववत ते – prevails; िनम मः  –
devoid of ‘mine-ness’; िनरह ारः  – devoid of ‘I-ness’; िन ामः  – free
from passions; शोभते – excels; बुधः  – the wise one
73. The illusion of this phenomenal world prevails until Self-
knowledge. The wise one lives devoid of ‘I-ness,’ devoid of ‘mine-
ness’ and free from passions.
According to the ‘categories’ of Vedānta (prakriyā), the apprehension
of Reality alone can destroy all mis-apprehensions. Hence we have
translated ‘the phenomenal world which lasts until Self-knowledge’
(buddhi-paryanta saṁsāre). But the subtle intellect of Janaka must
have grasped the delicate import when Sage Aṣṭāvakra had
deliberately used the term buddhi (intelligence) in his phrase. The
illusion of saṁsāra can end permanently only with the direct
perception of Reality; an illusion can exist in our mind only so long as
we are not prepared to look at it intelligently. To review the world of
plurality with a sharp, steady, discriminative intellect is to recognise
the illusory nature of the world of objects that we now, so readily,
take for granted.
Even physically the world of names and forms is almost
conclusively proved by physics and chemistry as having no basis at
all, at least, in the laboratory! Chemistry reduces all the names and
forms into energy. Physics declares to me that all that I perceive are
ordered by, governed by the relativity of time and space. Thus, in the
presence of intelligent observation, saṁsāra can never stand. It
persists in our stupidity and it is nurtured and nourished only by our
idle imaginations. The acceptance of this illusory world of plurality
and the consequent sorrows and suffering in it, are all true until the
student diligently investigates it.
On enquiry it becomes easily clear that it is the ego sense in us
which perceives the phenomenal world. The ego sense in us is the
‘perceiver’ of the world illusion and the ego feeling in us is our sense
of possession in the world. In short, the ego sense, as the perceiver
accepts the illusion of names and forms as true and the ego feeling
clings to the illusion with its possessiveness. He who has
transcended this ego has transcended both, his ego sense and his
ego feeling.
Where the subject is no more, the world of objects perceived by
him, rolls away, curls up and disappears! In the perfect Master the
ego has been removed entirely, permanently, by its very roots – the
ego, which stems up from passions. Indeed, such a sage,
established in his Self-realisation, excels not only among the
humanity, but even among the gods! He has become the very
substratum for the ‘Creator’, the ‘created world’ and the ‘individual
ego’ that have mysteriously sprung up during the state of delusion
from the one immutable Self.
अ यं  गतस ापमा ानं  प तो  मुनेः ।
   िव ा  च     वा  िव ं     देहोऽहम्  ममेित  वा॥७४॥
akṣayaṁ gata-santāpam-ātmānaṁ paśyato muneḥ,
kva vidyā ca kva vā viśvaṁ kva deho'ham mameti vā. (74)
अ यम् – imperishable; गतस ापम्  – free from grief; आ ानम् – Self;
प तः  – seeing; मुनेः  – to the wise one;    – where; िव ा – knowledge;
च – and;    – where; वा – or; िव म् – universe;    – where; अहं  देहः – I
am the body; मम  (देहः) – mine is the body; इित – thus; वा – or
74. To the wise one who perceives the Self as both imperishable and
free from grief, where is knowledge, and where is the universe?
Where is the feeling 'body am I' or the feeling 'mine is the body?'
Continuing to paint the picture of Man of Perfection for the edification
of the great student, the royal Saint Janaka, again and again, Sage
Aṣṭāvakra, grows more and more eloquent, as though he is honestly
feeling that, inspite of his brilliant exposition he has not
communicated even a vague picture of the inner experience of the
Liberated one!
To misunderstand ‘I am the body’ is the very seed from which
breeds all confusions of the mind, the destinies of the body
thereafter become the destinies of the individual because of his
extreme identification with his body. Such a sense of
‘possessiveness’ (mine-ness) comes towards all things related to the
comfort and happiness of the body. Thus the mistaken identity that
my body is myself sets me into a false relationship with the world
around me. In this web of delusory values the individual suffers and
this is called saṁsāra.
The sage who has risen above the ego, and realised that the Self
in him is imperishable and free from grief, how can there be in him
any more anxiety to know anything? He alone is. All knowledges are
‘objects’ of his awareness. He, as the Self, illumines all intellectual
conclusions, called ‘knowledges’. Having realised the Self, there is
nothing more to know. This question of Aṣṭāvakra here, echoes the
question with which the student approached the Master in the
Muṇḍaka-upaniṣad: ‘Sir, what is that knowledge by knowing which all
other knowledges become known?’30
The Self is ‘Knowledge of all knowledges’ inasmuch as it is in the
light of Consciousness we become aware of all conclusions arrived
at by the rational intellect.
We must come to know the greater Reality only when we are
perceiving the unreal world of names and forms. To the one who has
awakened to the Real, how can there be for him the perception of
the unreal? To him where is the universe?
िनरोधादीिन  कमा िण  जहाित  जडधीय िद।
मनोरथान्   लापां   कतु मा ो तत्   णात्॥७५॥
nirodhādīni karmāṇi jahāti jaḍadhīryadi,
manorathān pralāpāṁśca kartumāpnotyatat kṣaṇāt. (75)
िनरोध - आदीिन – control and so on; कमा िण  – practices; जहाित – leaves;
जडधीः  – one of dull intellect; यिद – if; मनोरथान्  – desires;  लापान् –
fancies; च – and; कतु म्  – to do; आ ोित – begins, arrives at; अतत्   णात्
– from that very moment
75. The moment a man of dull intellect gives up the practices of
mental control, he from that very moment begins to entertain desires
and fancies.
Here is a verse through which Aṣṭāvakra talks to the unprepared
students, encouraging them to continue their sādhanā, while at the
same time the sage has a subtle message in it for students
struggling in their higher meditations.
So long as there are vāsanās in an individual, he is ‘one of dull
intellect’ and he cannot stop practising mental control. For, the
instant he allows his mind to roam about, the released mind would
immediately jump into desire ruts and fly into its fancies. The
vāsanās, expressing in the intellect, are called ‘desires’; desires
expressed in the mind are called ‘thoughts’; the mind so agitated
soon gets lost in its own fancies and imaginations. Thus, early
seekers, should never give up their regular practices of control at
their body, mind and intellect levels – regulating the immoral and
unethical living at the body level; control of the low emotions and
baser passions at the mental level and attempts at settling the
thought flow of the intellect through study, reflections and
meditations.
The same verse has a deeper significance to all students who
are already struggling on the higher levels of intense meditation. To
them Aṣṭāvakra is asking a pertinent question. How can you expect
to control your mind with your own mind? This is illogical. Mind can
be controlled and brought under our command only when we rise
above the mind.
Our equipments will continue their efficient functioning; they are
only serving us in expressing our ‘ignorance’ (vāsanās). When the
mind is gushing forth efficiently into the sense objects, the spiritual
seeker, in the beginning considers this efficiency of his mind, as an
obstacle for the meditation. Therefore, he curbs the mind's royal
enthusiasm in its own functioning. Here the sage is indicating to the
student that mental control is a means; it is the path. The ‘end’ is
Self-realisation, the ‘goal’ is awakening to the Self. So long as we
are pursuing the ‘means’, we will not reach the ‘end’. When we reach
the ‘goal’, we must have left the ‘path’.
Thus, the foolish seeker should understand that the moment he
stops his mental control, his desire ridden ego will drive his mind
towards the sense objects. The desires in him manifest and his
power of imagination brings storms of disturbances into his mind. In
short, in the dull seeker the ego is not ended, his desires are only
suppressed and not sublimated.
From this dissection of the inner bosom of the struggling
sādhaka, the Teacher points out that mere self-control and yogika
practices alone, by themselves, cannot help in lifting man to
Godhood. He must grow to altitudes beyond the peaks of desires.
We have already mentioned very often that all yogika practices in the
early stages are horizontal flights from sense objects and mental
quakes. Here the call of Aṣṭāvakra to the students is that he had run
almost across the entire ‘runway’ and now he must take off!
Vertical flight through self-upliftment is the only way to detach
ourselves from the realms of delusion and mental illusions. The
various yogas pursued by a student can no doubt quieten the mind,
calm the intellect and thus generate maximum tranquillity and
serenity in the bosom. To misunderstand these passing moods of
inner peace and joy for the ultimate Realisation is a tragic mistake.
Many do. The sage has warned us.
The tranquil mind rendered temporarily peaceful as a result of
spiritual practices, is the ‘pad’ from which the meditation must rocket
up into the higher infinite Consciousness. In the realisation of the
Self alone complete transcendence can be achieved. The Supreme
is not gained as a result of yoga; the Infinite is with us, we have only
to realise it. Just ‘Be’.
म ः   ु ािप  त   ु  न  जहाित  िवमूढताम्।
िनिव क ो  बिहय  ाद िव षयलालसः॥७६॥
mandaḥ śrutvāpi tadvastu na jahāti vimūḍhatām,
nirvikalpo bahiryatnād-antarviṣayalālasaḥ. (76)
म ः  – the dull one;  ु ा  – hearing; अिप – even; तत्  – that; व  ु –
Reality; न – not; जहाित – gives up; िवमूढताम्  – delusion; िनिव क ः  –
with mental fluctuations suppressed; बिहः  – outwardly; य ात्  –
through effort; अ ः  – within; िवषयलालसः  – cravings for sense objects
(is)
76. A man of dull intellect even after hearing the Truth does not give
up his delusion. Though outwardly, through suppression he may
appear to be without mental fluctuations, a craving for sense objects
shall linger in him.
The seeker here is significantly described as ‘of dull intellect’
because he is one, who has yet no direct experience of the Self and
so is continuing his mental control exercises, in the false hope that
the yoga practices will one day reward him with the gift of Self-
realisation! Self is something that is already with us. No one can give
It. No body can gift It. Our own ego veils It from us. Ending the ego is
to be achieved not through yoga, but by direct experience. Jñāna
cannot help at this juncture; it has served us up to the threshold of
Reality. Now the seeker must heave into the state of Self in himself,
all by himself; vijñāna is the goal.
One, who is ready for this leap into the unknown, will no more
have the delusion of ego and its passions. The ‘dull-witted’ sādhaka
through suppression, might put up a saintly appearance of tranquillity
and may even experience, honestly in himself, a certain amount of
mental equipoise and serenity. But when the challenge is too severe,
he would find himself riddled with passions, lusts, greeds – often of
the lowest and basest types. Here the student gets extremely
desperate, supremely disappointed; his entire faith shatters, both in
himself and in the śāstras.
Aṣṭāvakra here shows a clean mirror for the seeker to recognise
the ugliness and crookedness of his inner personality! Deep in the
student lurks the subtle vāsanās for sense pleasure.
We are reminded of Śri Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful words in Bhagavad-gītā
where he consoles the seekers of the lesser order, when he says:
‘The objects of the senses turn away from the abstinent man, leaving
the longing (behind); but his longing also turns away on seeing the
Supreme.’31
Historically Aṣṭāvakra-gītā has been attributed to a period soon
after the Bhagavad-gītā. That was perhaps the main reason that
these twenty chapters are together called as Aṣṭāvakra-saṁhitā, to
make a subtle contrast with the content, theme and style of the Gītā.
Lord Kṛṣṇa’s Bhagavad-gītā addresses to the dynamic men of action
of the order of Arjuna. Aṣṭāvakra-saṁhitā whispers to only
meditators of the Janaka order. Kṛṣṇa’s eighteen chapters are songs
sung to quieten the agitations in the deluded man of action, the
despondent Arjuna on the battlefield, while, the twenty chapters here
are the thunderous roars whispered in the ears of the intelligent
seeker in his seat of meditation.
In short, both the verses suggest, in unequivocal words, that
control and suppression may help in the early stages, in relatively
quietening the bosom, but they must necessarily fail in completely
eliminating the tossings of the mind. Direct Self-realisation alone is
the only baptism that can purify the ego and divinise man into the
awareness of the supreme Self.
 ाना िलतकमा   यो  लोक   ािप  कम कृ त्।
ना ो वसरं  कतु   व  ुमेव  न  िक न॥७७॥
jñānā-dgalita-karmā yo lokadṛṣṭyāpi karmakṛt,
nāpnotyavasaraṁ kartuṁ vaktum-eva na kiñcana. (77)
 ानात् – owing to wisdom; गिलतकमा  – whose work has dropped; यः  –
who; लोक   ा – in the sight of the ordinary people; अिप – even;
कम कृ त्  – doing work; न – not; आ ोित – gets; अवसरम्  – occasion;
कतु म्  – to do; व  ुम्  – to say; एव – even; न – not; िक न – anything
77. He, whose work has dropped-off with the dawn of wisdom, may
undertake some work as seen by ordinary people. But he gets no
room or scope to do or to say anything.
Earlier Aṣṭāvakra had described the Man of Wisdom and his
relationship with his own physical body. He compared it with a dry
leaf that has fallen down from the tree. The dry leaf under the
compulsion of the passing breeze may apparently look more
dynamic than when it was on the tree, going about, fluttering, curling
up, swirling down, dancing along here and there all under the whims
of the passing breeze. The sage then declared that the body of the
Liberated in life moves about, functions and apparently serves the
humanity all under the compulsion of its prārabdha.
To the Realised sage there is no ego. He has neither the sense of
‘doership’, nor has he the attitude of ‘enjoyership’. Since he is, thus,
above his ego, he himself has no vanity that he is doing the work,
nor is he conscious of the glory of the mighty work he may have
inaugurated and accomplished. He works in the society, only from
the viewpoint of the ordinary people. Stop him on his path and ask
him, ‘What more should we do to add an extra momentum to your
mighty work?’ He is surprised and gets rather confused!
You are awakened from a dream and your entire family anxiously
questions you: What happened? What was the tragedy? Why did
you cry out for help? You, now awakened, are in a fix and indeed
ashamed of your dream!! What can the awakened Master say? How
can he answer?
The Liberated in life ‘gets no room or scope to do or say anything’
– there is no individual ego in him. The Upaniṣads explain that
through the sage, the total vāsanās of his era work. Can the
telescope of Nelson explain what he saw? Can the Kodaṇḍa bow of
Śrī Rāma give a description of Rāmāyaṇa, though it was always at
the shoulders of Dāśarathi and must have witnessed everything?
The sage is only an instrument. He is not responsible for what his
body does. He is not conscious of it at all. Is the tree responsible for
its dry leaf reaching your room in the passing breeze? He has no
sense of ‘doership’, and, therefore, he has no autobiography, after
his Self-realisation.
   तमः      काशो  वा  हानं     च  न  िक न।
िनिव कार   धीर   िनरात    सव दा॥७८॥
kva tamaḥ kva prakāśo vā hānaṁ kva ca na kiñcana,
nirvikārasya dhīrasya nirātaṅkasya sarvadā. (78)
   – where; तमः  – darkness;   – where;  काशः  – light; वा – or; हानम् –
loss;    – where; च – and; न – not; िक न – anything; िनिव कार  –
 ी ि  
unperturbed; धीर  – of the wise one; िनरात   – fearless; सव दा –
ever
78. To the wise one, who is ever unperturbed and fearless, where is
darkness? Where is light? Where is loss? There is nothing
whatsoever.
Knowledge and ignorance, light and darkness, loss and gain, are all
expressions of duality experienced at the level of the mind and the
intellect. To one, who has transcended the mind, where are these
pairs of opposites? He has no ignorance, because he has gained
Knowledge. But in the Man of Wisdom where is Knowledge?
Knowledge has a meaning only with reference to ignorance. One,
who has awakened to the pure Self and become the Illuminator of
both Knowledge and ignorance, he, as the supreme Self, can neither
be defined in terms of ignorance nor Knowledge.
In the infinite Bliss of his all-full nature, how can anything be
added so that he may profit by it, how can anything be taken away
from him, so that he may suffer a loss? Nothing can be added to the
Infinite. Nothing can be taken away from the Infinite. Infinite is ever
the Infinite. The profits gained in the dream or the losses suffered in
the dream, are both of no significance at all to the dreamer who has
now awakened!
   धैय      िववेिक ं     िनरात तािप  वा।
अिनवा   भाव   िनः भाव   योिगनः॥७९॥
kva dhairyaṁ kva vivekitvaṁ kva nirātaṅkatāpi vā,
anirvācyasvabhāvasya niḥsvabhāvasya yoginaḥ. (79)
   – where; धैय म् – patience;    – where; िववेिक म् – discrimination;
   – where; िनरात ता – fearlessness; अिप – even; वा – or;
अिनवा   भाव   – of indescribable nature (indefinable); िनः भाव   –
impersonal, attributeless; योिगनः  – of the yogin
79. For the fulfilled seeker (yogin), who is attributeless and of
undefinable nature, where is patience? Where is discrimination?
Where is even fearlessness?
These three qualities are essential for any seeker who dares to walk
the spiritual path: (1) patience, (2) discrimination and (3)
fearlessness. Lack of any one of them can cause the student’s fall
on the path. Everywhere all Masters have emphasised, again and
again, the need for cultivating these essential mental qualities in a
seeker undertaking the great pilgrimage.
A long staff, a water pot and, probably, a couple of blankets are
essential for one who is going on a trek up a mountain. But when he
has returned after his trip and has reached his home, should he still
carry the staff, the water pot and the blankets? They are all
necessary for his pilgrimage. But when he has reached the
destination, these things are naturally, dropped down. They are, now,
of no use to him at all. So long as we are struggling in the delusory
world of happenings – as miserable toys, being played about by the
whimsical fancies of the mind – at that time, to keep our balance and
swim to the shore we need the help of a piece of wood floating down
the river. When once we have reached safely the banks of the river,
should we carry that piece of wood on our shoulders, all the way,
when we are dragging ourselves home?
Patience, to continue meditations in spite of repeated failures
among waves of disturbances; ability to discriminate clearly, between
the inert matter vestures around us and the clear spiritual light of
Consciousness in our bosom; the daring heroism to face fearlessly
the total extinction of our limited ego during our plunge into the
infinite state of blissful Self – all these are the unavoidable and
necessary equipments to help the seeker on his path.
The Liberated in life, having already reached the goal, has no use
for these. Aṣṭāvakra confesses here that this ‘characterless
character’ (niḥsvabhāvaḥ) of a Self-realised Master is indeed
indescribable. The sage apologises himself to his student at his own
total inability to communicate the real nature of one who is truly
Liberated in life.
न   ग   नैव  नरको  जीव ु  न   चैव  िह।
ब ना   िकमु  ेन  योग   ा  न  िक न॥८०॥
na svargo naiva narako jīvanmuktirna caiva hi,
bahunātra kim-uktena yogadṛṣṭyā na kiñcana. (80)
न – not;  ग  ः  – heaven; न – not; एव – also; नरकः  – hell; जीव ु  ः  –
the state of Liberation in life; न – not; च – and; एव – even; िह –
indeed; ब ना – much; अ  – here; िकम्  – what need; उ  ेन – by
saying; योग   ा – in the yogika vision; न – not; िक न – anything
80. There is no heaven nor is there a hell, there is not even the state
of Liberation. In short, in the yogika vision nothing exists.
This does not mean that Aṣṭāvakra is nodding at the theory of non-
existence (śūnya-vāda) scaffolded up by the arguments of a group of
Buddhists. What he means here is certainly that in the awareness of
a perfect Master ‘nothing exists’ – nothing that you and I, from our
viewpoint, experience as existing. To a Realised saint ‘nothing exists’
except the one infinite Saccidānanda – the Self.
Heaven and hell are imaginary realms of experiences, conceived
by the deluded mind for its own pleasures and pains, under the
throes of its own good and bad vāsanās. To the ego, if the world is
real, heaven and hell can also be equally real! We are reminded of
the same Sage Aṣṭāvakra’s reply to king Janaka, when he wanted to
know which is real. The king dreamt that he was a beggar and on
waking up, he saw himself to be the king. Now is the beggar, the
king's dream; or the king, the beggar's dream? Aṣṭāvakra’s reply was
typical. The sage replied, ‘O king! if you think that the beggar was
real, the throne and the crown of yours is as real as the beggar of
your dream!’ If this world is real, to him heaven and hell shall be
equally real. These are all experiences at the ego level. The
Liberated in life is one who has risen above the ego. To him even
this world and his own body are never constantly in his awareness.
He has realised their illusory nature. How can he then, ever,
conceive of a heaven and a hell?
In him the God, the world and the ego – all have merged into the
very substratum, the Self – and That he is!
नैव   ाथ यते  लाभं  नालाभेनानुशोचित।
धीर   शीतलं  िच ममृतेनैव  पू रतम्॥८१॥
naiva prārthayate lābhaṁ nālābhenānuśocati,
dhīrasya śītalaṁ cittam-amṛtenaiva pūritam. (81)
न – not; एव – surely;  ाथ यते – long for; लाभम्  – gain; न – not; अलाभेन –
at the loss; अनुशोचित – grieves; धीर  – of the wise one; शीतलम् –
cool (serene); िच म्  – mind; अमृतेन – with nectar; एव – indeed; पू रतम्
– filled
81. A wise man neither longs for gain nor grieves at the loss. His
serene mind is indeed filled with the nectar – the supreme Bliss.
The limited alone can seek for a greater fulfilment, because of the
essential sense of imperfection in the limited. One, who is
conditioned by his own identifications with the body, mind and
intellect, alone can seek his temporary sense gratifications in the
fields of objects, emotions and thoughts. The hungry will seek food.
The thirsty will seek water. The limited must come to seek a greater
joy and satisfaction.
The Liberated in life has discovered his identity with the infinite
blissful Self and, therefore, he has no sense of imperfections in him.
The all-full cannot feel any gain from the delusory world of plurality
nor can he ever experience sorrows at any loss. We have already
pointed out earlier that nothing can be added to the Infinite nor can
anything be substracted from the Infinite. The ‘peace invocation’
(śānti pāṭha) of Upaniṣad declares it clearly: ‘From the whole, when
the whole is negated what remains is again the whole.’32
The bosom of the Man of Perfection is ever serene and tranquil –
absolutely ‘cool’. Compared with him our bosoms are always surging
and seething, boiling and gurgling with the lava of desires. Being
tranquil, the heart of the Man of Perfection is filled with nectar
(amṛtam). In the Hindu mythology, amṛtam (nectar) is considered a
pleasant and glorious drink of the heavens! Picturisation of the subtle
philosophical Truth is the style of the Purāṇas. The term amṛtam
means ‘immortality’, ‘deathlessness’. Death is nothing but change;
the death of the previous condition culminating in the birth of a new
condition is called ‘change’. Deathlessness, therefore, means the
‘state of changelessness’. Change is experienced in and by the
human mind and, therefore, one who has transcended the mind has
also crossed over the seething waters of change.
Aṣṭāvakra in this verse clearly illustrates that his pen can write
the poetic language of the Purāṇas.
न  शा ं   ौित  िन ामो  न  दु मिप  िन ित।
समदुः खसुख  ृ ः  िकि त्  कृ   ं  न  प ित॥८२॥
na śāntaṁ stauti niṣkāmo na duṣṭam-api nindati,
sama-duḥkha-sukhas-tṛptaḥ kiñcit kṛtyaṁ na paśyati. (82)
न – not; शा म्  – one who is calm;  ौित – praise; िन ामः  – one who
is completely free from desire; न – not; दु म्  – one who is wicked;
अिप – even; िन ित – blame; समदुः खसुखः  – same in happiness and
sorrow; तृ ः  – contented; िकि त् – anything; कृ  म् – to be achieved;
न – not; प ित – sees
82. The desireless one has neither praise for the calm nor even
blame for the wicked. Contented and the same in happiness and
misery, he finds nothing to be achieved.
The state of perfection as conceived by the great ṛṣis of India is a
state of desirelessness reached in the direct experience of infinite,
unearthly, inward peace – the Self. It is not suppression of desires, it
is not even sublimation of desires. It is a state wherein the individual,
in his own inner experience of immeasurable satisfaction and
happiness, is rendered incapable of entertaining any more desires!
Light and darkness cannot remain at one and the same time and at
one and the same place. Light is not absence of darkness, but light
is a state wherein darkness is incapable of playing about. Thus, the
state of desirelessness is not a condition arrived at by omission. It is
a state that is achieved by the positive experience of the Master,
when he awakens onto the larger dimension of the pure Self.
In the fullness of his conscious Bliss, the Liberated in life has
come to a state of desirelessness. Desires procreate thoughts and
‘thought flow’ is mind. In the Self-realised Master, there is no mind
and, therefore there must be absence of thought agitations. Mind
gives the delusory sense of ego; in a state of mindlessness, there
cannot be an ego.
It is the egocentric individuality in me that praises the beautiful in
life and condemns the wickedness of life. Where ego is not, neither
can that man of peace praise anything nor condemn anything. From
his viewpoint there is nothing other than the Self.
He is at peace with himself, calm and serene and no happenings
around him can ever gatecrash into his realm to agitate him there in
his Kingdom Divine. Naturally, he will be observed by us as equal
both in facing misery and in meeting happiness. We have already
explained how the Man of Realisation no more reacts with the world
of challenges. He has no ego to react with. Man of Perfection knows
only how to act spontaneously; he never reacts. This is the secret of
his unshakable ‘balance’ under all conditions.
He has achieved all that is to be achieved. We strive to achieve
something in order to complete ourselves. The sense of
incompleteness has ended in the glorious one who has exploded the
suffocating walls of his ego and has entered into the limitless bliss of
the Self. What more has he thereafter to achieve in life?
धीरो  न   ेि   संसारमा ानं  न  िद  ित।
हषा मष िविनमु  ो  न  मृतो  न  च  जीवित॥८३॥
dhīro na dveṣṭi saṁsāram-ātmānaṁ na didṛkṣati,
harṣāmarṣa-vinirmukto na mṛto na ca jīvati. (83)
धीरः  – the wise one; न – not;  ेि  – hates; संसारम्  – the world of
change; आ ानम्  – the Self; न – not; िद  ित – wishes to see;
हष अमष िविनमु  ः  – free from joy and sorrow; न – not; मृतः  – dead; न –
not; च – and; जीवित – lives
83. This wise one neither hates the world of change nor wishes to
‘see’ the Self. Free from joy and sorrow, he is neither dead nor alive.
The kindly paternal anxiety of Aṣṭāvakra to explain in words and
communicate to his disciple the condition of the Man of Perfection
makes the sage stammer into these verses. No doubt, Aṣṭāvakra is
the most eloquent Master but alas! Only to the few. He is not a mass
preacher as Śrī Kṛṣṇa is in the Bhagavad-gītā. In this lies the
difference in the ‘altitudes’ at which Gītā serenades in and Saṁhitā
cascades from.
It is the seeker who revolts against the realm of change
(saṁsāram) for all its perturbations and disturbances that shatter the
seeker’s mental peace and his intellectual poise. Again, it is a seeker
who is conscious of his imperfections, that revolts against his ego
and yearns to experience the unlimited, eternal Self. It is one, who
has not yet slept, who struggles to sleep!
The wise one, who has already realised the Self, to him there is
no more anxiety to experience (see) the Ᾱtman nor has he any
quarrel with the realm of change (saṁsāra), because, from his
standpoint there is nothing but the Self everywhere. Thus, he has
nothing to reject nor has he anything to accept in life. Physically he
appears to be with us living in the world, but certainly he is no more
a native in this globe!!
We cannot say that he is dead; he moves about, talks, eats,
sleeps as any other living human being. Therefore, certainly he is not
dead. But is he living? Whatever it be, he is not living like us. He
seems quite dead to the enchantments of the world around, to the
joys and sorrows of the world; he has no desires, no passions; he
never reacts to the external world. If an organism is incapable of
reacting to the external world, we generally consider that organism
as dead. A Man of Perfection is ‘dead’ because he never reacts. But
he is alive, for he acts. Thus, ordinary terms, with which we
categorise and, therefore, determine things, are all of no avail in the
description of the Liberated in life.
िनः  ेहः  पु दारादौ  िन ामो  िवषयेषु  च।
िनि  ः   शरीरेऽिप  िनराशः  शोभते  बुधः॥८४॥
niḥsnehaḥ putra-dārādau niṣkāmo viṣayeṣu ca,
niścintaḥ svaśarīre'pi nirāśaḥ śobhate budhaḥ. (84)
िनः  ेहः  – without attachment; पु दारा  आदौ – in the son, wife and
others; िन ामः  – without desire; िवषयेषु – in sense objects; च – and;
िनि  ः  – free from care;  शरीरे – for his own body; अिप – even;
िनराशः  – free from expectation; शोभते – lives in glory, shines; बुधः  –
the wise one
84. Shining (glorious) is the life of the wise man, free from all
expectations, without any attachment for children, wife and others,
free from desire for the sense objects, and without care even for his
own body.
These terms employed here, in describing the physical and mental
reactions of the Man of Perfection to the world outside, should
appear to the uninitiated as the descriptions of some horrible and
terrible satanic power! Without any attachment, with no desire, no
expectations and without even a care for his own body – here is a
congenital idiot, insentient to everything fine and beautiful in life!
This is the reason why Aṣṭāvakra has more than once already
explained that the inner experience of a Man of Wisdom can be
appreciated and understood only by another, who has the similar
experience. Words can only belie him. Our imperfect mind cannot
comprehend the majestic glory, the divine harmony, the brilliant
perfections of a Man of Self-realisation.
‘Shining’ (śobhate) with the effulgence of perfection is the life of
the wise man, which is not disturbed by his mental preoccupations
either with the future (expectations) or with the present, he has
neither ‘expectations’ nor ‘desires’. He is not disturbed by the
memories of his past; all attachments spring from the pleasant
memories of the past. You can never get attached to the son who is
not yet born, nor with a wife whom you have not yet married. How
can one have attachment to wealth that one has not yet earned and
saved?
The desire to seek happiness in sense objects, attachment to the
dear and near ones and great expectations for the larger joys, to be
fulfilled in the future – all these three – have a direct reference to the
body consciousness in the individual. The embodied, who is living in
identification with his own body, can never escape these three
sources of restlessness and sorrow. A Man of Perfection as
described here is above these three natural human weaknesses,
only because ‘he is without care, even for his own body’.
‘Identification with the body, the not-self’ is bondage; the Man of
Perfection has freed himself from the enmeshment of matter. He has
risen to a new dimension of living, where at this moment we have no
admission. And hence we are not able to recognise the beauty and
glory of the state in which the spiritual Masters live.
तुि ः  सव    धीर   यथापिततवित नः।
    ं  चरतो  देशा  ा िमतशाियनः॥८५॥
tuṣṭiḥ sarvatra dhīrasya yathā-patita-vartinaḥ,
svacchandaṁ carato deśān-yatrāstamita-śāyinaḥ. (85)
तुि ः  – (he is) contented; सव   – everywhere; धीर  – of the wise one;
यथापिततवित नः  – who lives on whatever comes to his lot;    म ्  – at
pleasure; चरतः  – roaming about; देशान्  – countries; य   अ िमतशाियनः
– resting wherever the sun sets
85. Contentment ever dwells in the heart of the wise man, who lives
upon whatever happens to come unasked as his lot and who roams
about at pleasure, resting wherever he is, when the sun sets!
Expectation of a greater happiness through acquisition and
rearrangement of things around us is the cause for all dis-
contentment. Seeking comfort from outside, man unfortunately
creates a miserable world for himself and for others. However much,
we may glorify this way of life by high sounding and noble looking
terms – like ‘healthy competitive living’ or ‘progressive living’ or ‘high
standards of living’ – we all know it is an unavoidable tragedy. We
may not declare so from political platforms and admit it in our
economic textbooks, but we know it is alright in the depth of our
hearts. The Man of Wisdom alone knows what true contentment is,
because he has discovered the source of all Bliss in himself. He is
no more a beggar, begging for his happiness and satisfaction at the
hovels of sense objects. His palace of Bliss is built within himself,
with the marbles of peace and joy.
Revelling ever in the luxurious bliss of the Self, the Master has no
demands for the world outside; nothing in the finite world can add to
his satisfaction, which he has already conquered in himself. Yet, his
body moving amidst the manifested world, continues to live and
function by its own momentum, gathered by it in the past. In him
there is no ego to give the equipment a propulsion of its own. The
body exists and moves about until its prārabdha is over.
This unmotivated apparent existence of the physical body is
being described here in this verse by Aṣṭāvakra. The Self-realised
roams about singing within him the glory that he has himself, with no
particular destination to reach, no itinerary to fulfil, no great grand
programme to complete. Rich in inward peace, fabulous in his
wisdom, he scatters his knowledge all about him, careless of
whether his generation is benefitted by his infinite bounty or not.
As far as he himself is concerned, he has no demand upon the
community for his sustenance. The barest minimum needs of man
have been defined by socialist economists as food, clothing and
shelter. The perfect Master has no expectation of even these three
fundamental needs. Under the wayside trees he has shelter.
Everyday he is clothed in fresh, new space (digambara)! Whatever
unasked comes to him as his lot, he enjoys them thoroughly!
Wealth or disease, worship or insults, abuses or praises, he
expects none of them. He faces them all with equanimity. For
whatever he sees is nothing but the Self. Whatever he hears is but a
ripple in the Consciousness. What does he lose if his generation
insults him? What has he to gain if others glorify him? He needs no
vote. He needs no throne. He is the Lord of all lords. He is the
sovereign of all sovereigns.... self-appointed for all times to come.
 े े ो ि
पततूदेतु  वा  देहो  ना   िच ा  महा नः।
 भावभूिमिव ा  िव ृताशेषसंसृतेः ॥८६॥
patatūdetu vā deho nāsya cintā mahātmanaḥ,
svabhāva-bhūmi-viśrānti-vismṛtāśeṣa-saṁsṛteḥ. (86)
पततु – may drop down dead; उदेतु – may rise up to live; वा – or; देहः  –
body; न – not; अ   – this; िच ा – care; महा नः  – of the great one;
 भावभूिमिव ा  िव ृतअशेषसंसृतेः  – who has completely transcended
birth and rebirth due to his repose upon the floor (foundation) of his
own Being
86. Reposing upon the floor (foundation) of his own Being and
completely transcending birth and rebirth, the great one does not
care whether his body drops down dead or rises up to live.
The entire world of phenomenon constituting the fields of
experiences and all the equipments of experiences in us, are all
superimposed upon the infinite Self, which is the great grand ground
upon which the universes rise up and play out their history. Having
awakened to this immutable Substratum Infinite, how can he ever
worry about the destinies of his insignificant, illusory body? From his
infinite altitude he can only view and see that universes are all
minute stresses in Consciousness. In one of such a universe is an
insignificant dot which represents our world of seven continents.
Among them one continent is Asia; in it is the subcontinent Bhārata.
In Bhārata is a little town or a village, where again in one street is a
house and in one corner of its veranda rests a microscopic dust
particle called ‘my body’! Now ‘whether it rises to live or drops down
to die’, how can it affect me who am the substratum for all the
universes?
The spiritual Master ever lives in his perfect identity with the
‘flood’ of Truth and, therefore, he is careless of his own physical
existence in the world of delusion. Having woken up from the dream,
what is your attitude towards the beautiful young body that you had
in the dream? Certainly you ‘do not care whether your body drops
down dead or rises up to live’ for you are now awake!!
अिक नः  कामचारो  िन       संशयः।
अस ः  सव भावेषु  के वलो  रमते  बुधः॥८७॥
akiñcanaḥ kāmacāro nirdvandvaśchinnasaṁśayaḥ,
asaktaḥ sarvabhāveṣu kevalo ramate budhaḥ. (87)
अिक नः  – without any possession; कामचारः  – moving at pleasure;
िन    ः  – free from the pairs of opposites; िछ संशयः  – whose doubts
have been cut asunder; अस ः  – unattached; सव भावेषु – in all things;
के वलः  – alone; रमते – rejoices; बुधः  – the wise one
87. The wise one stands alone, unattached to anything. He is without
any possession and moves at his will and pleasure. He is free from
the pairs of opposites and his doubts have been cut asunder. He,
indeed, is the blessed one.
The world of objects by themselves can never become a shackle
upon man. It is his sense of possession in them that reduces him to
an ego; the ego then suffers with its desires and passions for the
world of objects. This sense of possession can be towards objects,
towards beings or towards places. There are some who are attached
to their teachers; there are others who are attached to the Ganga
banks or to some other holy places. These are all certainly very
essential for the early seekers. The right place and the right
environments have a magic of their own, under the charm of which
the unbridled mind may, in the early stages, become available for the
taming and training necessary for it to take up a serious study of the
scriptures. Here in the case of a Man of Perfection, Aṣṭāvakra
explains, how the Master has no sense of possession at all and the
Liberated in life moves from place to place without any attachment to
the places. Mentally he is no more living at the egocentre and,
therefore, is not buffeted among the common agitations and torn
between joy and sorrow, honour and dishonour and such other pairs
of opposites.
Thus, physically he has no possessions; he is not attached to any
particular place. Mentally he is pacified enough not to be disturbed
by the pairs of opposites. The Master moves about freely in the
world. Even intellectually he is not disturbed by any doubts regarding
the Reality, since he is living, with every breath of his life, the
experience of the Self and, therefore, he has cut asunder all his
doubts. He is not only detached from ‘places’, but also detached
completely from ‘things and beings’. It is this attachment to places,
things and beings that is a source for all mental disturbances in the
worldly men.
Thus, the Man of Realisation revels alone in the 'Alone' all alone
(kevalaḥ ramate). The aloneness of the Self indicates the absolute
state and its all-pervasiveness. In the post there cannot be any trace
of the ghost! Never can the illusory snake leave its scales upon the
rope! Awakened to the Self, the infinite Consciousness, there cannot
be any trace of the world of illusions. The Truth ever alone is. This
state of aloneness, is the goal indicated in Vedānta, as the state of
‘kaivalya’.
The term employed by Aṣṭāvakra, to describe the Man of
Perfection, ‘whose doubts have been cut asunder’
(chinnasaṁśayaḥ) reminds us of the Muṇḍakopaniṣad: ‘When he
has seen both the Higher and the lower, the knots of his heart
become untied; all doubts are cut asunder, and all his karmas are
consumed.’33
िनम मः  शोभते  धीरः  समलो ा का नः।
सुिभ  दय   िव िनधू तरज मः॥८८॥
nirmamaḥ śobhate dhīraḥ sama-loṣṭāśma-kāñcanaḥ,
subhinna-hṛdaya-granthir-vinirdhūta-rajastamaḥ. (88)
ि   ो े ी
िनम मः  – devoid of ‘my-ness’; शोभते – excels (shines); धीरः  – the wise
one; समलो   अ का नः  – to whom a clod of earth, a precious stone
and a bar of gold is the same; सुिभ    दय     ः  – in whom the knots
of the heart are completely cut off; िविनधू तरजः  तमः  – who has
cleansed himself of both ‘rajas’ and ‘tamas’
88. The wise one, who is devoid of his ego and to whom a clod of
earth, a precious stone and a bar of gold are all the same, whose
knots of the heart have been cut asunder and who has cleansed
himself of all his ‘rajas’ and ‘tamas’, shines.
The verse under review serves as a rich museum exhibiting some of
the most precious phrases in our ancient literature. The verse shines
in its beauty, set with the fabulous thoughts of the Upaniṣads and the
eloquent phrases of the Gītā.
The Self-realised sage shines with an unearthly glow of godly
perfections! He has eliminated his limited mortal ego – the cancer of
the personality – that provides all the agonies of existence.
Intellectually he sees no plurality; even when he sees the world of
objects, they are all to him but ripplings in the Self, which is his own
nature. Therefore, to him things which are considered as precious
and covetable by the ‘ignorant’ worldly men are of no
consequence.34 To him a clod of earth or a precious stone or a bar of
gold are all nothing but ‘matter’ in different forms and colours and
they are essentially of no value. This phrase is bodily lifted from the
famous ‘song of the Lord’.35
The human personality is considered by the great ṛṣis in their
analysis as being bound by three powerful chords and these are
called as the ‘knots of the heart’ (hṛdaya granthiḥ). The heart of
human personality is conditioned by three essential but delusory
factors – ‘ignorance’ (avidyā), ‘desire’ (kāma) and ‘work’ (karma).
The spiritual ‘ignorance’ of our real nature causes us to feel, in
ourselves a sense of imperfection and the suggestions that the
intellect gives to complete this sense of imperfection are called
‘desires’. The intellectual desires breed agitations in the mind, which
express as vigorous ‘activities’ at the body level (karma). All these
three – ignorance, desire and work – limit us, curtail our freedom,
shackle us to pits of sorrow and pain, all through our physical
existence in this world.
The source of this triple personality entanglement is certainly the
‘non-apprehension of the Reality’, the spiritual ‘ignorance’ (avidyā).
Man of Perfection is one who has destroyed his ‘ignorance’ by his
direct, personal experience of the Self and, therefore, he has ‘cut
asunder’ all the painful knots upon the heart of his personality. This
expression echoes the ample significance roared in its original use in
Muṇḍakopaniṣad (2.2.8) and Kaṭhopaniṣad: ‘When all the knots of
the heart are severed here on earth, then the mortal becomes
immortal. So far is the instruction (of all Vedānta).’36
The spiritual 'ignorance' in us is expressed in our psychological
personality as three different mental climates called ‘sattva’, ‘rajas’
and ‘tamas’. All these three, obstruct our vision of the spiritual
Reality. ‘Tamas’ veils the intellect from its direct perception of the
Self (āvaraṇa). Then the mind gets affected by rajas; consequently
the mind starts projecting the world of plurality through its agitations
(vikṣepa). The veiling of the intellect (tamas) and the agitations of the
mind (rajas) together make us what we are – an egocentric non-
entity, capable of only desire, sorrows, sighs and tears!!
He, in whom ‘rajas’ and ‘tamas’ have been completely cleaned
off, is one whose mind is serene and the veiling gets completely
lifted. It is to lift the ‘rajas’ thus from our mind, that we have the
‘outer’ spiritual practices (bāhya sādhanā). It is to eliminate the
‘tamas’ from the intellect that the seekers are advised to practise
meditation, which is the ‘inner’ spiritual practice (ābhyantara
sādhanā).
Janaka is a disciple who has now only a very vague, thin misty
film of 'ignorance' in him. He stands at the threshold; hence the
advice of Aṣṭāvakra sounds strange to us, perhaps, unfamiliar and
even, foreign, when he criticises the student for entertaining even ‘an
anxiety for Liberation’ (Mumukṣutva) and discourages him from
pursuing even the ‘goals of life’ as recommended by the ṛṣis
(puruṣārtha). These advices addressed to such a student, who is
already reaching the summit, need not confuse the resolve,
determination, consistency and sincerity of the early seekers, who
have yet to walk the path – that sharp and narrow path.
Kaṭhopaniṣad calls it: ‘the razor's edge’ in the following words: ‘Like
the sharp edge of a razor is that path difficult to cross and hard to
tread – thus the wise say’37.
सव  ानवधान   न  िकि  ासना   िद।
मु ा नो  िवतृ    तुलना  के न  जायते॥८९॥
sarvatrānavadhānasya na kiñcid-vāsanā hṛdi,
muktātmano vitṛptasya tulanā kena jāyate. (89)
सव    अनवधान  – indifferent to all objects; न – not; िकि त्  – any;
वासना – desire;  िद – in the heart; मु आ नः  – of the liberated one;
िवतृ    – completely contented; तुलना – comparision; के न – with
whom; जायते – is
89. Who can be compared with a Liberated one, who has no desires
at all lingering in his heart, who is contented and totally indifferent to
everything?
In these few closing verses of the chapter Aṣṭāvakra is admitting that
however much we may explain the inner nature of the Man of
Perfection, in fact, we must necessarily fail to give a complete and
exhaustive report of his divine nature. He is indescribable. There is
none to whom he can be compared with. The unique beauty of the
Man of Perfection and his incomparable glory will ever be a wonder
to the human intellect. One who has emptied himself of all desires,
which are the impulses in all egocentric actions, who is so
completely contented in his own infinite inner peace and, therefore,
he who has become ‘totally indifferent to the enchanting world of
sense objects’ that individual though anatomically has still the shape
of a man, he has reached a new evolutionary height wherein he
cannot be considered any longer as a finite, mortal creature. His
inner life of thoughts and emotions is incomparable with anyone in
the universe. His inner experience is of the absolute Self, which is
the substratum for the universe. Aṣṭāvakra despairs and cries out:
‘Who can be compared with the Liberated man?’
जान िप  न  जानाित  प  िप  न  प ित।
 ुव िप  न  च   ूते  कोऽ ो  िनवा सना ते॥९०॥
jānannapi na jānāti paśyannapi na paśyati,
bruvannapi na ca brūte ko'nyo nirvāsanādṛte. (90)
जानन्  – knowing; अिप – even; न – not; जानाित – knows; प न ्  –
seeing; अिप – even; न – not; प ित – sees;  ुवन्  – speaking; अिप –
even; न – not; च – and;  ूते – speaks; कः  – who; अ ः  – other;
िनवा सनात्  ऋते – except the desireless one
90. Who, but the desireless one knows not though knowing, sees not
though seeing and speaks not though speaking?
The sage is trying to justify his exclamation in the previous verse that
the unique nature of the Man of Perfection is incomparable. Not only
that he is rid of all desires but in the Liberated in life there is no ego
at all. All our descriptions of another personality are always the
description of his ego. Here is one who has transcended his sense of
individuality and has merged with the universal substratum. We
cannot describe him as we would describe another man in the
community, in terms of what he thinks or what he perceives or what
he does. This is how we write autobiographies of great men. The life
history of a saint is impossible to write. He cannot be measured by
the activities of his mind and intellect nor can be be evaluated in
terms of what he has gained through his organs of perception nor by
what he has given to the world through his organs of action.
A Man of Perfection has a highly developed and a completely
disciplined outer and inner equipments as any other normal man, yet
Aṣṭāvakra despairs here that we cannot describe him in terms of his
activities by the equipments in him. The wise man in his Self-
realisation has ended completely his sense of ‘doership’ and
‘enjoyership’ and, therefore, even though he is knowing, there is no
knower in him; though he is seeing there is no seer in him; though he
is speaking there is no speaker in him. We are reminded of the
famous words of the Kaivalyopaniṣad: ‘I see without eyes, hear
without ears’38.
िभ ुवा   भूपितवा िप  यो  िन ामः  स  शोभते।
भावेषु  गिलता  य   शोभनाऽशोभना  मितः॥९१॥
bhikṣurvā bhūpatirvāpi yo niṣkāmaḥ sa śobhate,
bhāveṣu galitā yasya śobhanā'śobhanā matiḥ. (91)
िभ ुः  – beggar; वा – or; भूपितः  – king; वा – or; अिप – indeed; यः  – who;
िन ामः  – unattached; सः – he; शोभते – excels; भावेषु – at existent
things; गिलता – dropped; य   – whose; शोभना  अशोभना – good and
evil; मितः  – view
91. May he be a beggar or a king, he indeed excels who is
unattached and whose view of existent things has been freed from
the sense of good and evil.
From the Self and through the Self, the Self-realised man can only
be conscious of the Self, that is everywhere. The gold-smith sees but
gold whatever be the form of the ornaments. It is only the ego that
perceives the pluralistic world of phenomena and gets entrapped by
their false charms. One who is enslaved at the level of the ego,
prompted by his desires, gushes out to embrace the sense objects
and seeks his enjoyment among the unsatisfactory sense
gratifications. The very same world of objects is viewed from the Self
by the Master, who sees in and through them all the brilliancy and
glow, the beauty and effulgence of the ever-present Self everywhere.
Just as when we enter a mirrored hall, everywhere and at all points
we see but ourselves reflected, the spiritually awakened one sees
nothing but the Self, inherent in all names and forms everywhere and
at all times.
Mahopaniṣad also declares this fact of the spiritual life: ‘The very
same objects that increase desires and passions in the foolish mind,
those very same objects of enjoyments provide the Man of Wisdom
total dispassion.’39
Since the Man of Realisation recognises nothing but the absolute
Reality everywhere, in all things and at all places, he comes to rise
above the sense of good and evil. He is no more living in our level of
consciousness. He has awakened to be the infinite Self, himself.
    ा    ं     स ोचः     वा  त िविनि यः।
िन ा जाज वभूत   च रताथ    योिगनः॥९२॥
kva svācchandyaṁ kva saṅkocaḥ kva vā tattva-viniścayaḥ,
nirvyājārjava-bhūtasya caritārthasya yoginaḥ. (92)
   – where;  ा   म ्  – licentiousness;    – where; स ोचः  – restraint;
   – where; वा – or; त िविनि यः  – determination of Truth;
िन ा जाज वभूत   – who is the embodiment of guileless sincerity;
च रताथ    – who has fulfilled his desired end; योिगनः  – of the yogin
92. For the yogin, who has attained his fulfilment and who is an
embodiment of guileless sincerity, where is licentiousness? Where is
restraint? Where is determination of the truth of the Self?
The Realised saint is one who is constantly living in the Self, as the
Self. He has risen above his ego and, therefore, he is always away
from the vanity of ‘doership’. Naturally, what charm is it to him to be
licentious? How can he live a wanton life of sense indulgence? For
whose enjoyment? Where is meaning in his life now for ‘restraint of
sense organs’. These are all the activities of the ego. If there is, for
one, any sense of enjoyment in the pleasure of the objects in the
world around, certainly that ego must learn to live in restraint, so that
his mental energies are not wasted in the unproductive and
exhausting pursuits of sense gratifications. How can one, who has
awakened from a dream, practise either indulgence or restraint in the
dreamworld?
The Master who has risen above his ego, cannot be judged with
our ethical standards. He transcends every law. He is a law unto
himself! To the awakened man, the transcendental Reality stands
revealed in all Its infinite splendour and absolute beauty; where is for
him ‘the pursuit in search of Truth?’
He has conquered himself and reached the supreme goal of life.
He has crowned himself with the state of perfection. There is nothing
more for him to gain. He is the Truth. Where is the determination of
truth of the Self for him?
आ िव ा  तृ  ेन  िनराशेन  गताित ना।
अ य दनुभूयते  त थ ं  क   क ते॥९३॥
ātma-viśrānti-tṛptena nirāśena gatārtinā,
antaryad-anubhūyate tat-kathaṁ kasya kathyate. (93)
आ िव ा  तृ  ेन – one who is contented with the repose in the Self;
िनराशेन – desireless; गत  अित ना – who transcends his sorrows; अ ः  –
within; यत्  – which; अनुभूयते – is experienced; तत्  – that; कथम्  – how;
क   – to whom; क ते – can be said
93. How and to whom can be described, the inner experience of one
who is desireless, who transcends all his sorrows and who is
contented with his repose in the Self?
The despair of the Sage Aṣṭāvakra rises to a screaming crescendo
as he realises, more and more, his inability to communicate to his
brilliant student the true nature of the Liberated in life, even though
the sage himself is fully experiencing It. The state of perfection
refuses to come within the embrace of language. This
transcendental Experience Divine can never be forced to crystallise
as an idea in the limited, finite intellect and, therefore, words cannot
describe this Experience Unique wherein the subject and the object
merged into one homogeneous Whole!!
The Upaniṣads themselves despair in their inability to express
this transcendental nature of the supreme Reality. In utter despair
the ṛṣi cries out in Taittirīya-upaniṣad: ‘From where the mind along
with speech returns, disappointed’40.
The Truth transcends the mind and other equipments and,
therefore, these equipments are of no use in the ‘perceptions’ of the
Self. The Self-realised Master, liberated from the vehicles of matter,
on awakening to the pure Consciousness becomes the Self, says
Muṇḍakopaniṣad. ‘Knower of the Brahman becomes the
Brahman’41.
Naturally, the Teacher asks how we can describe such a Master
and to whom can we describe him, who will understand that state of
transcendence?
सु ोऽिप  न  सुषु ौ  च     ेऽिप  शियतो  न  च।
जागरेऽिप  न  जागित   धीर ृ ः  पदे  पदे॥९४॥
supto'pi na suṣuptau ca svapne'pi śayito na ca,
jāgare'pi na jāgarti dhīrastṛptaḥ pade pade. (94)
 ि ौ
सु ः  – asleep; अिप – even; न – not; सुषु ौ  – in deep sleep; च – and;
   े – in dream; अिप – even; शियतः  – lying; न – not; च – and; जागरे –
in waking state; अिप – even; न – not; जागित  – is awake; धीरः  – the
wise one; तृ ः  – contented; पदे  पदे – under all conditions
94. The wise one is not asleep, even when in deep sleep. He is not
lying down, even when dreaming. He is not awake, even in his
waking state. He is contented under all conditions.
For the first time in the Saṁhitā, Aṣṭāvakra is making an attempt to
describe the Man of Perfection with reference to our common
experiences in the three different planes of Consciousness.
Ordinarily a man gathers his total experiences of life from the planes
of the waking, dream and dreamless sleep. The Liberated in life is
one who has transcended all these usual planes, wherein we
function through our gross, subtle and causal bodies. The Self-
realised, lives awakened to the ‘fourth plane of Consciousness’
(turīya), in a state of unbroken ‘ecstasy’. He has identified himself
with the pure Consciousness here, which is the very Consciousness
that illumines all the experiences in the three lesser states of
awareness in all creatures, everywhere.
We, in our ‘ignorance’ identify ourselves totally with our gross,
subtle and causal bodies and thus come to live intensely and
exclusively either the experience of the ‘waking’ or of the ‘dream’ or
of the ‘deep sleep’. One who has transcended these three
equipments and has realised his essence in the Self, he too, though
continues to be in the waking, dream and deep sleep states, cannot
be considered as a waker, dreamer, and deep sleeper inasmuch as
his identifications with the realms of the not-Self have been
completely eliminated and consequently, there is no sense of ego in
him. He has become a ‘witness’42 of all that is happening, through
the three bodies, in the three states of consciousness.
Therefore, Aṣṭāvakra explains ‘the wise one is not asleep even
when in deep sleep; is not lying down even when dreaming; is not
awake even when in the waking state’. The ego alone can
experience, in its vanity, that ‘I am the waker, dreamer or the deep
sleeper’ and directly lives the joys and sorrows in all these three
planes.
‘Ignorance’ expresses itself in two ways : the ‘non-apprehension
of Reality’ and the ‘misapprehensions of the same’. The state of
‘non-apprehension of Reality’ is the state of sleep, wherein the
sleeper is not comprehending anything at all. The state of
‘misapprehension of the Reality’ is the state of dream, when the
dreamer has experiences but his entire world is made up of the
fancies of his own mind.
According to the textbooks of higher Vedānta, in the above sense
of these terms, the Ᾱcāryas consider that the entire human life is
composed of only two states – dream and deep sleep. The waking
also is a kind of ‘dream’ inasmuch as therein also we have not got
the knowledge of the Reality, the perceived world of plurality is also
made up of our ‘misapprehensions’.
This usage of these familiar terms of Upaniṣads – waking, dream
and deep sleep – is employed by Aṣṭāvakra in the verse under our
review. Though apparently the physical body is resting in deep sleep,
the yogin has never ‘the non-apprehension of Reality’ (Self).
Similarly, even while the yogin is ‘dreaming’ – be it the projected
world outside his body (waking) or inside his bosom (dream) – his
ego never crystallises and, therefore, revelling ever in the experience
of the Self, never perceives ‘any misapprehensions of Reality’. ‘He is
not awake’ even while he is awake to the phenomenal world, as he
has no sense of ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’ in his waking world. He is not
‘awake’, he is really Awake that is he is not ‘awake’ to the world of
names and forms, but is really awake to the transcendental Self.
 ः  सिच ोऽिप  िनि  ः  से  योऽिप  िन र  यः।
सबु  रिप  िनबु   ः  साह ारोऽनहंकृ ितः॥९५॥
jñaḥ sacinto'pi niścintaḥ sendriyo'pi nirindriyaḥ,
sabuddhirapi nirbuddhiḥ sāhaṅkāro'nahaṅkṛtiḥ. (95)
 ः  – the Man of Wisdom; सिच ः  – thinks; अिप – though; िनि  ः  –
devoid of thoughts; से  यः  (स - इ  यः) – possessed of sense organs;
अिप – though; िनर - इ  यः  – devoid of sense organs; सबु  ः  –
possessed of intelligence; अिप – though; िनबु   ः  – devoid of
intelligence; साह ारः  – possessed of egoism (अिप – though);
अनहंकृ ितः  – devoid of ego
95. The Man of Wisdom is devoid of thoughts even when he thinks.
He is devoid of sense organs even though he possesses them. He is
devoid of intelligence even though endowed with an intellect. He is
devoid of egoism even though he possesses an ego.
The Liberated in life has got mind and its thoughts, sense organs
and their sense perceptions, an intellect and its intelligence. He has
certainly a sense of individuality, ego and, therefore, he must have
‘egoism’. Yet, in this miserable complex, together called ‘a living
mortal personality’, the wise man has no sense of identification and
so, Aṣṭāvakra is compelled to describe him, in a maddening
language of contradictions, as he has employed in this verse. The
Realised one has all equipments in him, but there is no sense of
‘doership’ in him. From an ordinary observer’s standpoint, a sage is
apparently making use of all his equipments and living a normal life
just as anyone else. The only distinction that lifts him to be a unique
divine creature in the community of men is in that, he has no sense
of ‘doership’ or ‘enjoyership’ in his pulsating vigorous equipments.
Without the sense of ego, even the life in the equipments is
nothing but a continuous experience of the Self! The ‘non-
apprehension of Reality’ (tamas) has no sorrows in it (deep sleep).
The ‘misapprehensions that are projected by the mind’ (dream and
waking) have really no sorrows in themselves. But having projected,
when the mind identifies with its own imaginations, in this unholy
wedlock between the mind and its projections, is born the ego and it
is this ego, as the subject, that experiences the joys and sorrows of
its delusory world.
Right at the moment of perception, there is, in fact, no experience
at all. The experience is registered by the ego, only as a memory. ‘I
saw’ is an experience; ‘I see’ is a spontaneous flare of
Consciousness! Every experience is a thought. Every thought
entertained is a subtle memory of the past. Thought bundle is the
ego – therefore, the ego is nothing but a heap of dead experiences,
a mass of memories!!
The Man of Perfection lives in the immediate experiences. He
refuses to drag the past to muddy the present. He lives eternally in
Consciousness, which illumines all experiences, in all bosoms, at all
times, in all places.
न  सुखी  न  च  वा  दुः खी  न  िवर ो  न  स वान्।
न  मुमु ुन   वा  मु ो  न  िकि    च  िक न॥९६॥
na sukhī na ca vā duḥkhī na virakto na saṅgavān,
na mumukṣurna vā mukto na kiñcinna ca kiñcana. (96)
न – not; सुखी – happy; न – not; च – and; वा – or; दुः खी – miserable; न –
not; िवर ः  – unattached; न – not; स वान्  – attached; न – not; मुमु ुः  –
aspirant for Liberation; न – not; वा – or; मु ः  – Liberated; न – not;
िकि त्  – something; न – not; च – and; िक न – anything
96. The wise one is neither happy nor miserable, neither attached
nor unattached, neither Liberated nor an aspirant for Liberation, he is
neither this nor that.
In so many words, through repeated verses, the sage is confessing
that it is impossible to explain, to another, the nature of the Man of
Perfection and his attitude towards life. He lives beyond the
equipments and views the world from his giddy heights; we, who are
still in the entanglements of our own intellect, can never even
vaguely comprehend the state of the Experience Transcendental.
Joy and sorrow are experiences at the realm of the mind. The
Man of Realisation is neither happy nor miserable – meaning he is
never identified with his mind.
The sense of attachment and non-attachment are experiences
judged and maintained at the intellectual level. A true saint is not
identified with his intellect and, therefore, we cannot describe him in
terms of either his attachments or his non-attachments.
From the spiritual level we can define one person as Liberated
and another one, who is a serious student, as one aspiring to get
himself liberated. A Man of Perfection is neither Liberated nor is he
an aspirant for Liberation, because he has ‘awakened’ to the
Supreme and from his new heights of wisdom, he looks back to
realise, that never was he ever in bondage and, so has never been
liberated!! Having awakened from the dream, will you strive to
escape the prison in which you were, during the dream?
In short, nothing can be predicated of the Master, who has
become one with the Self: ‘He is neither this nor that’ (na kiñcit na ca
kiñcana).
Even the most voluminous classic in Vedānta, Yogavāsiṣṭha,
when it comes to the point of explaining the mental attitude and inner
experience of the Liberated in life, loudly despairs: ‘When the mind
leaves perceptions and delusions, ignorance and illusions, it comes
immediately to rest in some inexplicable and unique state’43.
िव ेपेऽिप  न  िवि  ः  समाधौ  न  समािधमान्।
जा  ेऽिप  न  जडो  ध ः  पा    ेऽिप  न  प  तः ॥९७॥
vikṣepe'pi na vikṣiptaḥ samādhau na samādhimān,
jāḍye'pi na jaḍo dhanyaḥ pāṇḍitye'pi na paṇḍitaḥ. (97)
िव ेपे – in distraction; अिप – even; न – not; िवि  ः  – distracted; समाधौ
– in samādhi; न – not; समािधमान्  – in meditation; जा  े – in dullness;
अिप – even; न – not; जडः  – dull; ध ः  – the blessed one; पा    े – in
learning; अिप – even; न – not; प  तः  – learned
97. The blessed one is not distracted even in distraction. He is not in
meditation even in samādhi. He is not dull even in a state of
dullness. And he is not learned, even though possessed of learning.
This is not an exceptional style characteristic of only Aṣṭāvakra. All
Masters have to employ ‘the language of contradictions’ when they
come to explain the inexplicable! This is the only way in which an
attempt can be made to ‘describe the indescribable’. This can read
as confusions, only to those who are trying to understand it with their
intellect. This is not a thing that is to be understood by the intellect.
All confusions will end when the seeker transcends his body
consciousness. Experience alone can reveal the Truth. The śāstras
can only point out the path, the way. The seeker must earn his own
direct experience.
Man of Wisdom is in essence other than what he appears to be.
In his realisation he stands distinctly separate from and as
something other than ‘the ever-changing complex’ constituted of his
matter vestures. He is extremely unconcerned with his mental
conditions, nay, even with his physical destinies. Distractions, the
poise of meditation, the slumberous dullness, the erudition and
scholarship of learning – all these – are only attributes of the mind
and intellect. One who has transcended these equipments, how can
he be affected by these attributes?
From verse ninety-four onwards it is a brilliant lyrical cry
expressing the inability of man’s intellectual judgement and of his
poetic sentiment to comprehend and understand the glory and
grandeur that is the Man of Realisation. Indeed, it is but most
appropriate to call this eloquent chapter as ‘The Goal’, wherein we
have hundred beautiful and precise indications each pointing to the
unique beauty and inexpressible glory of the Liberated in life.
मु ो  यथा  थित  थः  कृ तकत  िनवृ तः।
समः  सव    वैतृ ा    र कृ तं  कृ तम्॥९८॥
mukto yathā-sthiti-svasthaḥ kṛta-kartavya-nirvṛtaḥ,
samaḥ sarvatra vaitṛṣṇyānna smaratyakṛtaṁ kṛtam. (98)
मु ः  – Liberated one; यथा  थित  थः  – abiding in the Self in all
conditions; कृ तकत  िनवृ तः  – free from the idea of action and duty;
समः  – same; सव   – everywhere; वैतृ ात ्  – due to the absence of
desires; न – not;  रित – broods over; अकृ तम्  – what has not been
done; कृ तम्  – what has been done
98. The Liberated one, who abides in the Self under all conditions, is
released from the idea of actions and of duty. He is the same
everywhere and due to the absence of desires in him, does not
brood over what he has done and what he has not done.
The main idea that has been hammered all through the chapter is
again being hinted at, lest the student should overlook its
significance. The Man of Perfection has neither the ego sense (I-
ness) nor the ego feeling (my-ness). Since he has no ego, he has no
sense of action or duty. ‘Due to the absence of desires in him’ he has
no regrets in life. He refuses to look back to remember what he has
accomplished in life or not accomplished in life. Neither by
commission nor by omission can the mind of the Master ever get
disturbed. He never broods over the past or upon the future. He lives
in the ‘eternal present’. He is a law unto himself, he is unique.44
 ी े ो ि ो ि
न   ीयते  व  मानो  िन  मानो  न  कु  ित।
नैवोि जित  मरणे  जीवने  नािभन ित॥९९॥
na prīyate vandyamāno nindyamāno na kupyati,
naivodvijati maraṇe jīvane nābhinandati. (99)
न – not;  ीयते – is pleased; व  मानः  – praised; िन  मानः  – blamed; न –
not; कु  ित – annoyed; न – not; उि जित – fears; मरणे – at death; जीवने
– in life; न – not; अिभन ित – rejoices
99. The Liberated in life does not feel pleased when praised nor
does he feel annoyed when blamed. He neither rejoices in life nor
fears death.
Having awakened to the absolute Consciousness Divine, he no more
dwells in the physical body and, therefore, relative experiences are
no more his. The world cannot touch him. The storms and clouds,
the thunders and lightnings of the passionate world of matter can
play only at the feet of his gigantic Divine Colossus. He dwells on the
peaks, which is lost to our vision among the heavens.
The praise and insults, honour and dishonour of the pygmies of
the world are all of no concern to him. He neither feels elevated by
our appreciations nor is he dejected and despaired at our insults. He
needs no compliments of his age. He is self-sufficient unto himself.
He lives in this world to give and not to take. He accepts nothing,
desires nothing.
He neither rejoices in life nor is he, when threatened with
destruction, afraid of death! Calm and serene he faces life. To him
the existence in the body is but a play. He has become the true
existence which is the substratum for the whole universe.
The diction used in this verse is reminiscent of the lingering
phrases of the brilliant Bhagavad-gita: ‘Who neither rejoices nor
hates, his wisdom is firm’45.
‘And who cannot be agitated by the world’.46
न  धावित  जनाकीण   नार मुपशा धीः।
यथा  तथा  य   त   सम  एवावित ते॥१००॥
na dhāvati janākīrṇaṁ nāraṇyam-upaśāntadhīḥ,
yathā tathā yatra tatra sama evāvatiṣṭhate. (100)
न – not; धावित – runs after; जन  अकीण म्  – crowded places; न – not;
अर म्  – solitude of the forest; उपशा धीः  – one whose mind is
serene; यथा  तथा – in any way; य   त  – anywhere; सम – the same; एव
– indeed; अवित ते – lives
100. The serene minded Master seeks neither the crowded place nor
the solitude of the forest. He remains the same under any condition,
in any place.
Established as he is in the Experience Transcendental, nothing
affects him at all, wherever he be. He is not affected by the
environments. He is the one who influences the entire atmosphere
by his presence and glory. To him it is immaterial whether he is in a
crowded town or in a solitary cave of the Himalayan forests!
Whether he be amidst the majestic objects of the market places,
amidst the din and roar of human frailties, he is ever established in
the Self. Even in the lonely forest of the mighty Himalayas he is the
same. To him there is no distinction. His inner experience of
perfection cannot be obstructed under any conditions. He is ever in
the infinite Bliss, which is the nature of the Self.
Bhagavad-gītā thunders: ‘The Supreme is the flawless state, the
same everywhere’47.
Wherever he is, under whatever conditions, he remains the
same, unaffected by his physical experiences which are ordered by
his prārabdha.48
This concluding verse of this chapter, now under review, echoes
an idea which Janaka gave earlier. ‘Oh! I do not find any duality;
even in the midst of multitude of human beings. I feel like I am in a
forest. Towards what should I then feel attachment?’49
A statement in Annapūrṇopaniṣad throws a flood of light,
explaining why the Master feels so readily indifferent under all
conditions. Declares the Upaniṣad: ‘Let him revel in the midst of the
populace, or let him spend his time in the glorification and the
worship of the Lord. He knows neither his sorrows nor his joys, just
as a sun that is reflected.’50
The reflection of the sun in the waters may dance, may break up
but the sun in the heaven is not affected by the conditions of the
reflected sun. Similarly, the pure infinite Consciousness, which is
now the nature of the Man of Perfection, is not affected by the
experiences of the ‘ego’ in him – the light of Consciousness playing
in his mind! Master is egoless, hence he is unaffected by the outer
environments.
1 satyānṛtavastvabhedapratītiradhyāsaḥ.
2 ayamahamidamātataṁ mameti sphuritamapāsya balādasatyamantaḥ,
ripumatibalinaṁ mano nihatya praśamamupaimi namo'stu te viveka.
– Yogavāsiṣṭha-5.9.65
3 dūrāt sudūre tadihāntike ca,
paśyatsvihaiva nihitaṁ guhāyām. – Muṇḍakopaniṣad-3.1.7
4 śuddho muktaḥ sadaivātmā na vai badhyet karhicit,
bandhamokṣau manaḥsaṁsthau tasmiñcchānte praśāmyati.
5 lakṣyalakṣyagatiṁ tyaktvā yastiṣṭhetkevalātmanā,
śiva eva svayaṁ sākṣādayaṁ brahmaviduttamaḥ. – Vivekacūḍāmaṇi-554
6 karmaṇyakarma yaḥ paśyedakarmaṇi ca karma yaḥ,
sabuddhimān-manuṣyeṣu sa yuktaḥ kṛtsnakarmakṛt. – Bhagavad-gītā-4.18
7 nānavāptamavāptavyaṁ varta eva ca karmaṇi. – Bhagavad-gītā-3.22
8 paścāt pāvanapāvanaṁ padamajaṁ tatprāpya tacchītalaṁ,
tatsaṁsthena na śocyate punaralaṁ puṁsā mahāpatsvapi. – Yogavāsiṣṭha
9 śītalācchatarātmanaḥ – acchatara - svacchatara
10 Bhagavad-gītā – 3.26 to 28, 4.20 & 21. 5.8.9 & 13, 13.9 and 18.58
11 atad-vādī – not a tat-vādī – one who can explain clearly what he is. He who
can explain the goal, to gain which he is pursuing all his efforts, he is
described as a tat-vādī – a sage has no motive to explain and so is an atad-
vādī – like a fool!!
12 There is another reading of this verse which we find in some editions
wherein it is spelt as na kiñcid–dhī-kṛtaṁ kṛtam meaning ‘one who has no ego,
indeed even what he does is not an act’. The reading that we have selected
has a deeper transcendental significance and hence our choice.
13 The wise one does freely whatever comes to be done, whether good or evil;
for his actions are like those of a child.
14 vayaṁ tu vaktuṁ mūrkhāṇāmajitātmīyacetasām,
bhogakardamamagnānām na vidmo'bhimataṁ matam. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-
5.18.13
……………………
teṣāmabhimatā nāryaḥ bhāvābhāvavibhūṣitāḥ. – Yogavāsiṣṭha -5.18.14
15 pūrvaṁ vivekena tanutvameti rāgo'tha vairaṁ ca samūlameva,
paścātparikṣīyata eva yatnaḥ saḥ pāvano yatra vivekitāsti.
– Yogavāsiṣṭha-4.18.70
16 yastvātmaratireva syādātmatṛptaśca mānavaḥ,
ātmanyeva ca santuṣṭastasya kāryaṁ na vidyate. – Bhagavad-gītā-3.17
17 This particular style in thought of Aṣṭāvakra is seen in the entire chapter-3
entitled ‘Self in All – All in Self’.
18 ……………………..
bhārūpaikasvarūpe'smin svarūpeṇa jayāmyaham. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-5.27.22
19 Pure materialists in Indian philosophy – the supreme atheists.
20 dvitīyāt vai bhayaṁ bhavati. – Bṛhadāraṇyaka-upaniṣad-1.4.2
21 viṣayā vinivartante nirāhārasya dehinaḥ,
rasavarja raso'pyasya paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate. – Bhagavad-gītā-2.59
22 Aṣṭāvakra-gītā-18.29
23 samatvaṁ yoga ucyate. – Bhagavad-gītā-2.48
24 yogaḥ karmasu kauśalam. – Bhagavad-gītā-2.50
25 yadṛcchā lābha santuṣṭaḥ ……. . – Bhagavad-gītā-4.22
26 sarvārambhaparityāgī yo madbhaktaḥ sa me priyaḥ. – Bhagavad-gītā-12.16
sarvārambhaparityāgī guṇātītaḥ sa ucyate. – Bhagavad-gītā-14.25
sarvārambhā hi doṣeṇa dhūmenāgnirivāvṛtāḥ. – Bhagavad-Gītā-18.48
27 devadatto'hamityetad vijñānaṁ nirapekṣakam,
tadvad brahmavido'pyasya brahmāhamiti vedanam. – Vivekacūḍāmaṇi – 533
28 aśaṅkitā'pi samprāptā grāmayātrā yathā'dhvagaiḥ,
prekṣyate tadvadeva jñairbhogaśrīravalokyate. – Mahopaniṣad-5.72
29 atrānātmanyahamiti matirbandhaḥ ………… . – Vivekacūḍāmaṇi-137
30 kasminnu bhagavo vijñāte sarvamidaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavatīti.
– Muṇḍaka-upaniṣad-1.1.3
31 viṣayā vinivartante nirāhārasya dehinaḥ,
rasavarjaṁ raso'pyasya paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate. – Bhagavad-gītā-2.59
32 pūrṇasya pūrṇamādāya pūrṇamevāvaśiṣyate.
33 bhidyate hṛdayagranthiḥ chidyante sarvasaṁśayāḥ,
kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi tasmin dṛṣṭe parāvare. – Muṇḍakopaniṣad-2-2-8
34 In this connection, it is very interesting to observe that among some tribes
in deep Africa, we are told that the canine teeth of the wild dogs are very
precious inasmuch as the ladies there string them together to wear as a
necklace. To them, perhaps diamond is not of such a great value; pearls are of
no significance but the dog's teeth are precious. Some of the hippies in the
modern cities move about hanging a bell from their necks, they consider it very
precious and covetable; while in India only grazing cows wear such bells in
their necks!! The things by themselves are not precious, it is the possessor
that gives them their values.
35 Bhagavad-gītā – 6.8
36 yadā sarve prabhidyante hṛdayasyeha granthayaḥ,
atha martyo'mṛto bhavatyetāvadanuśāsanam. – Kaṭhopaniṣad-2.3.15
37 …………………………
kṣurasya dhārā niśitā duratyayā durgaṁ pathastatkavayo vadanti.
– Kaṭhopaniṣad-1.3.14
38 ……paśyāmyacakṣuḥ sa śṛṇomyakarṇaḥ – Kaivalyopaniṣad-21
39 yaireva jāyate rāgo mūrkhasyādhikatāṁ gataiḥ,
taireva bhogaiḥ prājñasya virāga upajāyate. – Mahopaniṣad-5.169
40 yato vāco nivartante aprāpya manasā saha. ………. – Taittirīya-upaniṣad-
2.9
41 brahma veda brahmaiva bhavati – Muṇḍakopaniṣad-3.2.9
42 avasthā-traya-sākṣī – Witness of all happenings in all the three states of
consciousness – Waking, dream and deep sleep – is the Self.
43 tatastejastamonidrāmohādi parivarjitam,
kāmapyavasthāmāsthāya viśaśrāma manaḥ kṣaṇam. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-5.54.53
44 vilakṣaṇaḥ – unique
45 ………………
nābhinandati na dveṣṭi tasya prajñā pratiṣṭhitā. – Bhagavad-gītā-2.57
46 …………… lokānnodvijate ca yaḥ. – Bhagavad-gītā-12.15
47 …………………………….
nirdoṣaṁ hi samaṁ brahma ……….... – Bhagavad-gītā-5.19
48 Aṣṭāvakra-gītā-18.21
49 Aṣṭāvakra-gītā-2.21
50 viharan janatāvṛnde devakīrtanapūjanaiḥ,
khedāhlādau na jānāti pratibimbagatairiva. – Annapūrṇopaniṣad-5.99

Chapter 19
The Grandeur of the Self
Introduction
The thunderous eloquence of Aṣṭāvakra in the previous chapter
expounded the ‘spiritual goal’ of human life and painted, as vividly as
words could, the nature of the Liberated in life (Jīvanmukta). When
perfect Masters, like Aṣṭāvakra, inspiredly talk on spiritual themes,
they do not aim at public applauses. Theirs is the mission of not only
communicating the spiritual knowledge to their listeners, but also
strive to help the seekers to gain a direct experience of the goal
indicated.
All seekers are not able to immediately gain a vision of the
Reality, because of their inherent mental unpreparedness for the
revelation. But perfect students like Janaka understand the words of
the Masters to be ‘pointers on the road’ and as seekers, they have
the mental subtlety to lift themselves in the directions so clearly
pointed out. This process of ‘hearing’ the Teacher and at the same
time lifting our mind into those marvellous heights of perfection, is
called the process of ‘listening’ (śravaṇa). The Upaniṣads are never
tired of indicating the infallibility of the process of ‘listening’.
To a true student revelation of the Self comes instantaneously,
during his intense listening in rapt attention. Here, Janaka has
accomplished the true listening and, hence, when his Master has
concluded his previous discourse, in this chapter the student rises to
mould in words his Self-experience. Communication of joy is a way
of intensifying and enlarging the bliss experienced. Janaka exclaims
over the grandeur of his repose in the Self, for his Teacher's
satisfaction. The fulfilment of Knowledge in direct vision and wisdom
is the unique goal of true ‘listening of Vedānta’ (śravaṇa).
If the previous chapter is listened to or ardently studied, with
Janaka’s attention, the result would be the same in any spiritual
student. In eight verses, Janaka here explains the majestic peace
which is the state of the Self, the majestic grandeur of the pure
Consciousness.
Beyond the ordinary goals of life (puruṣārtha), beyond all
metaphysical speculations, transcending all the concepts of time and
space, far removed from the tumults of life and death, dwells the
majestic glory of the infinite Self in its own unique majesty. This, in
short, is Janaka's narration in the chapter.
The Tejobindu-upaniṣad endorses: ‘Those who have purified their
minds and cultivated the alertness necessary to comprehend the
Self, they alone apprehend the pure Brahman, not others who
merely prattle the dialects and quote the letter, of the śāstras.’1
जनक  उवाच
त िव ानस ंशमादाय   दयोदरात्।
नानािवधपरामश श ो ारः  कृ तो  मया॥१॥
janaka uvāca
tattva-vijñāna-sandaṁśam-ādāya hṛdayodarāt,
nānāvidha-parāmarśa-śalyoddhāraḥ kṛto mayā. (1)
त िव ानस ंशम् – the pincers of the knowledge of Truth; आदाय –
taking;  दय  उदरात् – from the innermost recesses of the heart;
 ि  
नानािवध  परामश श   उ ारः – the extraction of the thorn of diverse
judgements; कृ तो – is done; मया – by me
Janaka said:
1. Using the pincers of knowledge of Truth, from the innermost
recesses of my heart, I have extracted the thorn of adverse opinions.
‘Though Truth is one, sages call it differently’2 and this is because in
the past, every Master in India talked only to teach unlike
philosophers in the west who strive now to propound their ‘new’
philosophy or declare their ‘fresh’ definitions of Truth. The ṛṣis
always taught to a student or a team of students, who had
approached them requesting for guidance in their spiritual
pilgrimage. Each Master thus analysed the student and guided from
where he was, to the same grand peak. The different philosophies
thus expound but different approaches, all of them in the end, arrive
at the same subjective experience at the same temple of Reality.
Each Master, in advocating his thoughts, was excruciatingly
logical and each carried an irresistible intellectual charm. To enter
into these diverse arguments for a mere intellectual entertainment,
would unavoidably produce, in the student, a lot of unnecessary
mental agitations breeding unnatural doubts and their unhealthy
restlessness. Ᾱcārya Śaṅkara has warned the students against this
hazard on the path of study, in his Vivekacūḍāmaṇi: ‘Commentaries
on philosophies constitute a thick jungle in which a roaming mind
may easily get lost in its own delusion. Therefore, true seekers of
Brahman should through right efforts come to experience the real
nature of the Self.’3
All these confusions in the mind can really end with the direct
perception of the Self. With a sense of utter gratitude the student
here, the royal Sage Janaka, confesses that he has cleared his mind
of all its doubts. Only with the ‘forceps’ of direct knowledge can we
remove the ‘thorns’ of doubts that ulcerate in the deepest depths of
our personality.
Study can guide us but the knowledge of the text cannot gift us
with the Reality. The Upaniṣads repeatedly warn us that mere study
of the text and repeated listening to various Masters cannot, by
themselves, take us near the Truth until we decide to move towards
it: ‘This Ᾱtman cannot be attained by study of Veda, nor by
intelligence, nor by much hearing’4.
The entire verse echoes with the natural sentiments of gratitude
that every student feels towards the Master who guided him to his
own Self and thereby helped him to escape the Self-created tortures
of endless sorrows. We read such sentiments expressed by the
students of the Upaniṣads both in the Bṛhadāraṇyakopaniṣad and in
the Praśnopaniṣad. ‘Thou art our father who helps to go across the
ocean of our thick ignorance’5.
   धम ः     च  वा  कामः     चाथ ः     िववेिकता।
    ैतं     च  वाऽ ैतं   मिहि     थत   मे॥२॥
kva dharmaḥ kva ca vā kāmaḥ kva cārthaḥ kva vivekitā,
kva dvaitaṁ kva ca vā'dvaitaṁ svamahimni sthitasya me. (2)
   – where; धम ः  – piety, meritorious deeds;    – where; च – and; वा –
or; कामः – desire;    – where; च – and; अथ ः  – prosperity;    – where;
िववेिकता – conscience, discrimination;    – where;  ैतम् – duality;    –
where; च – and; वा – or; अ ैतम् – non-duality;   - मिहि  – in my own
grandeur;   थत  – abiding; मे – my
2. Where is piety? Where is desire? Where is wealth? Where indeed
is conscience? Where is duality and where, again, is non-duality? for
me who abides in my own grandeur.
From his unique state of infinite Self, Janaka exclaims that he cannot
recognise, from where he is, the significance, or even the glory, of
the various lesser ‘goals of life’ that is ‘piety’ (dharma), ‘wealth’
(artha) and ‘desire’ (kāma). As there is no conflict between his own
knowledge and his egocentric activities, there is no question of any
‘pangs of conscience’ (vivekitā) in him.
As a means of directing the mind of the student from the
disturbing realm of plurality, the Masters of Upaniṣads had directed
their students towards the non-dual Self, one without a second. This
non-duality is an illusory attribute of the Self, no doubt, endorsed and
accepted by the ṛṣis, as it would help the students to walk out of their
greater illusions of the world of multiplicity. Once the seeker
transcends his mind, even the concept of non-duality will become
meaningless. The Self alone is. In this universal state of pure
Existence nothing can be predicated. Every attempt at verbalisation
of the absolute Self is an unforgivable blasphemy against Truth.
Declares Avadhūta-gītā: ‘Some want duality, others want non-duality.
They do not apprehend the Truth. It is neither duality nor non-
duality’6.
Chāndogyopaniṣad calls this state, which is transcending both
duality and non-duality, as Bhūmā. In this discussion the question
came up as to where does the Bhūmā abide? The answer was:
‘There where nothing is perceived as other, nothing is heard as
other, nothing is known as other, that is infinite Bhūmā; where
something is perceived as other, something is heard as other,
something is known as other that is finite (alpam); that which is
infinite (bhūmā), that is immortal; what is finite, that is mortal. Where
is, Sir, this Bhūmā abiding? It abides in its own grandeur, which is
non-grandeur.’7
   भूतं     भिव  ा  वत मानमिप     वा।
   देशः     च  वा  िन ं   मिहि     थत   मे॥३॥
kva bhūtaṁ kva bhaviṣyadvā vartamānamapi kva vā,
kva deśaḥ kva ca vā nityaṁ svamahimni sthitasya me. (3)
   – where; भूतम् – past;    – where; भिव त् – future; वा – or; वत मानम्
– present; अिप – even;    – where; वा – or;    – where; देशः – space;
   – where; च – and; वा – or; िन म् – eternity;   - मिहि     थत   मे – for
me abiding in my own grandeur
3. Where is the past? Where is the future? Where, even, is the
present? Where is space? Where, even, is eternity for me who abide
in my own grandeur.
Time and space are really the concepts of the mind and intellect.
Where the mind-intellect is not functioning, as in deep sleep or under
chloroform, the individual has no such measurements in his
experience. Time and its duration are as much the creation of the
human mind as the concept of space and its distances.
Distances are measured in space between two relative points, let
us say between two points A and B. From A to B the distance may
be any linear measurement; but in all these cases we know, that at
point A the distance is always zero, whatever be the distance
measured at point B.
In the same way the duration of time is measured as ‘the interval
between any two successive experiences’. You, perhaps, started
reading this book at 10-00 a.m. and you stopped reading at 11-00
a.m. Then the interval between these two different experiences is
called the measurement of time. Every experience is entertained by
the mind in terms of its thoughts. Thus the interval between thoughts
is the unit measurement of time. If there is no other experience-B,
then the time ceases; at experience-A time is zero!
In the seeker, who has transcended his mind, there can be no
thoughts and, therefore, the concepts of both 'time and space'
cannot be in him, when he is abiding beyond his mind, in the Self.
In ‘time’ the mind again entertains the illusory ideas of the past,
present and future. In the Self these illusions can have no valid
existence. For one, who has thus transcended the concepts of both
‘time and space’ the very idea of ‘eternity’ has no meaning, because
the very concepts of eternity is ‘non-stop time’.
On transcending the mind, Janaka confesses, he has arrived at a
realm of experience, where the world of plurality cannot come to
play, as it has not got the ‘time space’ frame-work for the names and
forms to exist.
   चा ा     च  वाऽना ा     शुभं   ाशुभं  तथा।
   िच ा     च  वाऽिच ा   मिहि     थत   मे॥४॥
kva cātmā kva ca vā'nātmā kva śubhaṁ kvāśubhaṁ tathā,
kva cintā kva ca vā'cintā svamahimni sthitasya me. (4)
   – where; च – and; आ ा – Self;    – where; च – and; वा – or; अना ा
– not-Self;    – where; शुभम् – good;    – where; अशुभम् – evil; तथा –
similarly;    – where; िच ा – anxiety;    – where; च – and; वा – or;
अिच ा – non-anxiety;   - मिहि     थत   मे – for me abiding in my own
grandeur
4. Where is the Self? Where is the not-Self? Where, similarly, are
good and evil? Where is anxiety or non-anxiety for me, who abide in
my own grandeur.
On awakening from the dream the entire subject-object world of the
dream disappears to merge with the very essence and substance of
the waker’s mind. In the same way on awakening, from the present
state of our existence, into the infinite state of the Self, Janaka
exclaims that he, in his new state, cannot conceive the distinction
between the Self and the not-Self or between the good and evil or
between the condition of anxiety and non-anxiety. All these are
sustained and interpreted by the human mind. On transcending the
mind one rediscovers the Self and in the Self, where are these
illusions of the mind?
The Sanskrit terms ‘cintā’ and ‘acintā’ are translated here as
‘anxiety’ and ‘non-anxiety’. Some commentators, however, have
interpreted these two terms as ‘meditation’ and ‘non meditation’. This
rendering is equally acceptable. In one’s delusory state, when the
ego is trying to transcend the mind, there is a ‘state of meditation’.
When the ego, is turned outward, fattening the mind and
preoccupied with its joys of sense gratifications, there is the ‘state of
non meditation’. Both these have a reference to the introvertedness
and the extrovertedness of the mind. On transcending the mind and
reaching the Self, there can be neither meditation state nor the non
meditation state.
     ः     सुषु  वा      च  जागरणं  तथा।
   तुरीयं  भयं  वािप   मिहि     थत   मे॥५॥
kva svapnaḥ kva suṣuptirvā kva ca jāgaraṇaṁ tathā,
kva turīyaṁ bhayaṁ vāpi svamahimni sthitasya me. (5)
   – where;   ः  – dream;    – where; सुषु  ः  – deep sleep; वा – or;  
– where; च – and; जागरणम् – wakefulness; तथा – and also;    –
where; तुरीयम् – fourth state of consciousness; भयम् – fear; वा  (   ) –
or (where); अिप – even;  मिहि     थत   मे – for me abiding in my own
grandeur
5. Where is dream? Where is deep sleep? Where is wakefulness?
And also where is the fourth state of Consciousness? Where is even
fear for me, who abide in my own grandeur?
Māṇḍūkya-upaniṣad, for the first time, has scientifically observed
and philosophically analysed an individual's experience in the three
fields of consciousness – the waking, the dream and the deep sleep.
With reference to these three fields – of the waker, of the dreamer
and of the deep sleeper – on transcending the gross, subtle and the
causal bodies, the ego disappears into the vision of the fourth plane
of Consciousness (turīya). In terms of the known alone the unknown
can be defined and indicated. In Māṇḍūkya-upaniṣad, the ṛṣi has
kindly indicated this pure state of Consciousness, from our world of
experiences, in the relative field.
Just as on awakening from the dream, the dreamer and his
dreamworld merge into the waker, so too, on reaching this fourth
plane, we transcend the earlier three states of delusion and,
therefore, the experience of the pure Self cannot be called as the
fourth plane. This is the transcendental experience of the absolute
Self.
Janaka here denies for himself all these four delusions of
Consciousness, as he has got fully established in the Self, as the
Self.
All ‘fears’ belong to the ego, due to its desires, so declares the
Bṛhadāraṇyaka-upaniṣad: ‘From the perception of the other, fear
comes’8. The Liberated in life, awakened to the infinite Self,
experiences nothing other than Self within and without and as such,
asks Janaka, ‘Where is even fear for me?’
In sheer spiritual audacity there is no text that can stand a
parallel to the firm and daring assertions of Avadhūta-gītā: ‘When the
three are not there, how can there be the fourth state of
consciousness? When the threefold division of time is not there, how
can there be ‘direction’ (space)? The supreme Truth is a state of
peace. I am Immortal, Knowledge ever the same like the sky’9.
   दू रं     समीपम्  वा  बा ं   ा  र ं     वा।
    थूलं     च  वा  सू  ं   मिहि     थत   मे॥६॥
kva dūraṁ kva samīpam vā bāhyaṁ kvābhyantaraṁ kva vā,
kva sthūlaṁ kva ca vā sūkṣmaṁ svamahimni sthitasya me. (6)
   – where; दू रम् – distance;    – where; समीपम् – near; वा – or; बा म्
– outside;    – where; अ  रम् – inside;    – where; वा – or;    –
where;  थूलम् – the gross;    – where; च – and; वा – or; सू म ् – the
subtle;  मिहि     थत   मे – for me who abide in my own grandeur
6. Where is distance? Where is nearness? Where is outside? Where
is inside? Where is the gross and where is the subtle for me, who
abide in my own grandeur?
All these distinctions are recognised by the ego as it looks out upon
the illusory world of plurality, when the Truth is mis-interpreted by the
mind in agitation. The tamoguṇa dims the powers of discrimination in
the human intellect and it comes to ‘ignore’ the Truth. To ignore ‘the
Reality’ is the condition of ‘ignorance’. When the intellect is thus
veiled, the mind projects, in fanciful imaginations, a world of
multiplicity and it gets itself restless in the play of ‘rajas’. Thereafter,
it distinguishes ‘far and near’, ‘outside and inside’, ‘gross and subtle’
and such other endless varieties of delusions.
When the mind was hushed, in the alert moments of intense
listening, in Janaka, the veiling of his intellect dropped and the Truth
revealed Itself. ‘One who is thus firmly abiding in the experience of
the infinite Self’ wonders Janaka, ‘How can he now have the illusions
which the mind then created for his temporary entertainment?’
   मृ  ुज िवतं  वा     लोकाः   ा      लौिककम्।
   लयः     समािधवा    मिहि     थत   मे॥७॥
kva mṛtyurjīvitaṁ vā kva lokāḥ kvāsya kva laukikam,
kva layaḥ kva samādhirvā svamahimni sthitasya me. (7)
 ीि ो
   – where; मृ  ुः  – death; जीिवतम् – life; वा – or;    – where; लोकाः –
worlds;    – where; अ   ( मम ) – my;    – where; लौिककम् - worldly
relation;    – where; लयः – dissolution of consciousness;    – where;
समािधः – samādhi (concentration); वा – or;  मिहि     थत   मे – for me
who abide in my own grandeur
7. Where is life or where is death? Where are the worlds or where
are the worldly relations? Where is dissolution of consciousness?
Where is samādhi for me, who in my own grandeur abide?
Life and death, the world as fields of experiences, the worldly
relations – all these – are interpretations and concepts of the mind
and intellect. As ego, which is living in the awareness of plurality,
strives in its spiritual pursuit, to liquidate its 'consciousness of
objects' by withdrawing its mind entirely from the objects and by
turning it into the contemplation of the immutable Self – the witness
of all. In this way, the ego tries to reach a state of ‘laya’ wherein it
achieves to a larger extent the ‘dissolution of consciousness’ of the
multiple world. This process of ‘laya’ is often advised as a
precondition before diving into samādhi, wherein the ego ends in the
infinite flare of Enlightenment. Janaka, who has already gained the
goal and has established himself in the Self, must necessarily
wonder what has he to do any more with ‘laya’ or samādhi.
अलं  ि वग कथया  योग   कथयाऽ लम्।
अलं  िव ानकथया  िव ा    ममा िन॥८॥
alaṁ trivargakathayā yogasya kathayā'pyalam,
alaṁ vijñānakathayā viśrāntasya mamātmani. (8)
अलम् – needless; ि वग कथया – of talking about the three ends of life;
योग  – of yoga; कथया – of talking; अिप – even; अलम् – needless;
अलम् – needless; िव ानकथया – talks of direct knowledge; िव ा    –
reposing; मम – my; आ िन – in the Self
8. For me, who repose in the Self, talks about the three ‘goals of life’
are useless; talks about yoga are purposeless and even talks about
direct knowledge are needless!
The shoreless peace and the boundless contentment experienced
by the Man of Realisation in his divine sense of fulfilment is vividly
echoed in this brilliant verse, with which, Janaka concludes his
autobiographical spiritual confession. The three ‘goals of life’
(dharma, artha, kāma), yoga and direct experience in samādhi, are
all means for the realisation of the Self. To one who has already
realised, the means are no more of any significance. Should one
who has crossed river, carry the boat on his head?
The experience of the Self is self-sufficient unto Itself. It needs
nothing else to complete it. It is absolute in its perfection. All the
means of realisation are to smuggle the ego out of its illusions into
the effulgent light of the supreme Reality.
1 yeṣāṁ vṛttiḥ samā vṛddhā paripakvā ca sā punaḥ,
te vai sadbrahmatāṁ prāptā netare śabdavādinaḥ. – Tejobindu-upaniṣad-1.45
2 ekaṁ sat viprāḥ bahudhā vadanti
3 śabdajālaṁ mahāraṇyaṁ citta-bhramaṇa-kāraṇam,
ataḥ prayatnājjñātavyaṁ tattvajñaistattvamātmanaḥ. – Vivekacūḍāmaṇi-60
4 nāyamātmā pravacanena labhyo na medhayā na bahunā śrutena.
– Kaṭhopaniṣad-1.2.23
5 ….. tvaṁ hi naḥ pitā yo'smākam
avidyāyāḥ paraṁ pāraṁ tārayasīti …. – Praśnopaniṣad-6.8
6 advaitaṁ kecidicchanti dvaitamicchanti cāpare,
samaṁ tattvaṁ na vindanti dvaitādvaitavivarjitam. – Avadhūta-gītā-I.36
7 yatra nānyat-paśyati nānyat-śṛṇoti
nānyat-vijānāti sa bhūmātha
yatra-anyat-paśyati-anyat-śṛṇoti
anyat-vijānāti tadalpaṁ
yo vai bhūmā tadamṛtam-
atha yadalpaṁ tanmartyam.
sa bhagavaḥ kasmin-pratiṣṭhita iti.
sve mahimni yadi vā na mahimnīti. – Chāndogyopaniṣad-7.24.1
8 dvitīyāt vai bhayaṁ bhavati – Bṛhadāraṇyaka-upaniṣad-1.4.2
9 sthānatrayaṁ yadi ca neti kathaṁ turīyaṁ 
kālatrayaṁ yadi ca neti kathaṁ diśaśca,
śāntaṁ padaṁ hi paramaṁ paramārthatattvaṁ 
jñānāmṛtaṁ samarasaṁ gaganopamo'ham. – Avadhūta-gītā-3.20

Chapter 20
The Absolute State
Introduction
In communicating to the seekers the unsurpassing beauty and
indefinable perfections of the Absolute, the Upaniṣads stammer, the
Brahmasūtras exhaust themselves and the Bhagavad-gītā hesitates
with an excusable shyness. A theme, in dealing with which, even
these mighty books of Hinduism are thus, at best, unsatisfactory; we
must, in sheer gratitude, admire Aṣṭāvakra Saṁhitā for the brilliant
success it has achieved in communicating, through words, perhaps,
more clearly the nature and glory of the supreme Reality, than by the
Prasthāna Traya. In this concluding chapter, the absolute state of
transcendence is brought home to us, not so much because of the
frenzied eloquence of the Teacher, nor by the extra fluidity of the
diction chosen, but essentially because of the human touch that has
been imparted to it by putting this chapter into the mouth of King
Janaka. The student of this Saṁhitā is himself giving the autobio-
data of the Liberated in life. We have here in this chapter a revealing
autobiography of the saint, the Liberated in life in King Janaka.
The absolute Self with no relationship with anything is the subtle
theme of this sacred chapter. The aloneness of the Self surpasses
all empirical terms that generally determine and often clearly define
any other phenomenon in the relative field of experiences. Beyond
all assertions and denial, beyond the concepts of bondage and
Liberation, lies this realm of the Self, wherein there is neither the
individual ego (jīva) nor is there even the supreme Reality
(Brahman)!
Aṣṭāvakra here dexterously uses contradictions and paradoxes
as a painter would artistically use his colours or a surgeon would
clinically wield his instruments. Repeatedly the reader is shocked
and often jerked out of his intellectualism to a point certainly nearer
the direct experience of the pure Self!
There is a geometry in the very construction of this chapter. In
every verse, Janaka, indicates the Liberated in life in him, with a
significant and revealing term, which can rocket the mind of a
meditative student onto Realms Transcendental. Each of these
chosen phrases serve as an ego to Self-rocket! The ‘stainless’
(nirañjana), ‘beyond the sense of duality’ (gata dvandva), ‘state of no
attributes’ (arūpa) and so on, are examples. Each of these terms
must be considered as highly inflammable, when it comes to the
bosom of a true meditator! Each one of them can get ignited to burn
with the clear light of wisdom and as a torch it can illumine the dark
and lonely path, through which must march every seeker, the alone
to the Alone, all alone.
It has already been said earlier by Aṣṭāvakra that the Self is
beyond speech, understanding and even contemplation. It was
clearly suggested that to end meditation, in meditation, with
meditation is the highest fulfilment of meditation.
Throughout the Saṁhitā and particularly in this finale, the sage
with artistic precision and with a surgeon's efficient carefulness has
used deliberate contradictions and chosen paradoxes to blast up and
remove from the intellectual student his inherent fascination for
objective logic and reason.
No doubt, sense of logic and alertness of reason distinguish man
from the animal kingdom. They are his glory and his beauty. Yet, on
the path of the spiritual rediscovery, having made use of these
faculties of logic and reason to their maximum, the student must
learn the art of discarding them – even the intellect is to be
transcended – after they had fulfilled their functions.
The beauty and fragrance of the petals must fade, dry and curl up
to fall down, when the delicate blossom perishes into the emergence
of the fruit!
Transcending the intellect, stretches the dimensionless infinitude
of peace and beatitude; Aṣṭāvakra’s technique stands justified and
entirely fulfilled in Janaka, the Liberated in life.
जनक  उवाच
   भूतािन     देहो  वा   े   यािण     वा  मनः।
   शू  ं     च  नैरा  ं  म  प े  िनर ने॥१॥
janaka uvāca
kva bhūtāni kva deho vā kvendriyāṇi kva vā manaḥ,
kva śūnyaṁ kva ca nairāśyaṁ matsvarūpe nirañjane. (1)
   – where; भूतािन – the five great elements;    – where; देहः  – body;
वा – or;    – where; इ  यािण  – organs;    – where; वा – or; मनः  –
mind;    – where; शू म् – void;    – where; च – and; नैरा म् –
despair; मत्    प े – in my essential nature; िनर ने – stainless
Janaka said:
1. Where are the five great elements and where is the body? Where
are the organs and where is the mind? Where is the void and where
is despair for me, who am by nature stainless?
All through these fourteen verses of this chapter, Janaka is giving us
the autobiography of the Liberated in life in him. Nobody else can
write the story of a saint, biography of a sage. At best, it is the
description of the physical beauty of a singer and the grace of her
enchanting performance to an inspired audience, described by an
enthusiastic writer, who is both dumb and deaf from birth!
From the awakened state of the Self, which transcends all
relative planes, there are neither the five elements nor the physical
body formed out of them. Neither are there the organs of perception,
nor the instruments of action nor the mind, that is built up by our
perceptions and our responses. If the elements are the cause, the
body is their effect. If the sense organs are the cause, the mind is
their effect. By denying them, Janaka is denying the ‘cause-effect
relationship’ which is so true when we are in the egocentric state of
perceiving our world of plurality through our mind.
Transcending ‘cause and effect’ which have an existence only in
the world that we perceive through our body, mind and intellect
equipments is the Self, which, as Consciousness, is the illuminator of
these two assertions of the intellect. The illuminator is always
different from the illumined. Identified with the Self, Janaka could
recognise neither the cause nor accept the world of effects, in his
intense Experience Immutable.
When all the ‘effects’ are thus eliminated, the intellect can
conceive only a ‘void’, a state of complete absence of things, just as
the condition we experience in deep sleep. This ‘void’ (śūnya) has
been conceived by a certain school of Buddhists as the highest
state. Janaka, contradicts this fallacious conclusions, when he asks,
‘Where is despair?’ To be in the ‘void’ is to feel utter despair. It is a
state of total negation of both the worlds of ‘objects’ and the ‘subject’,
the meditator himself. It is boundless loneliness. It is a sheer tragedy
and weary despair. Vedānta asserts that a Man of Realisation rises
above both the sense of void and its consequent despairs, into the
serene repose of the stainless Self. Janaka endorses this with his
own direct experience.
The Self is the ultimate ‘Subject’, where there are no objects at
all. In the realm of the objects alone can the cause-effect
phenomenon function. Here three sets of examples are given to
represent all ‘cause-effect relationships’ comprehended at all levels
of our personality. The five elements and body includes all ‘cause-
effect relationships’ experienced at the body level; the sense organs
and mind embraces all such relationships that are at mental level;
and the ‘consequent despair’ can be considered to represent, in
itself, all ‘cause-effect’ perceptions at the intellectual level.
   शा ं   ा िव ानं     वा  िनिव षयं  मनः।
   तृ  ः     िवतृ   ं  गत      मे  सदा॥२॥
kva śāstraṁ kvātmavijñānaṁ kva vā nirviṣayaṁ manaḥ,
kva tṛptiḥ kva vitṛṣṇatvaṁ gata-dvandvasya me sadā. (2)
   – where; शा म् – scriptures;    – where; आ िव ानम्  – knowledge
of the Self;    – where; वा – or; िनिव षयम् - detachment from sense
objects; मनः  – mind;    – where; तृ  ः  – contentment;    – where;
िवतृ  म ् – desirelessness; गत     – who has transcended the
duality of the pairs of opposites; मे – for me; सदा – ever
2. Where are the scriptures? Where is the knowledge of the Self?
Where is the mind detached from the sense objects and where is
contentment? Where is desirelessness for me, who has transcended
the duality of the pairs of opposites?
So long as we are functioning at the mental level as an ego, we
cannot avoid perceiving the world of plurality and experiencing the
pairs of opposites. One who has transcended the mind, has
eliminated his ego and, therefore, in him there is no sense of
'enjoyership' to experience the pairs of opposites.
All the scriptural textbooks are addressed to the ego, which is
suffering from its sense of ‘doership’ and ‘enjoyership’. The
scriptures try to give the student a clear knowledge of the blissful
and perfect nature of the Self. In order to realise this seat of
Consciousness, the scriptures advise the students to detach their
minds from sense objects, since without arresting the outgoing
tendencies of the mind, it cannot be persuaded to have a steady
inward gaze.
Even the sense of contentment of the mind and the state of
desirelessness of the intellect can have no meaning for the Liberated
in life as he has transcended both his mind and intellect!
This state, indicated here, is not for our intellectual appreciation;
it is to be realised. And it can be realised only when the seeker
accomplishes what these verses are screaming. The knowledge of
the Self lies not in the texts of even the Vedas. It awaits for your
direct experience in your own Self.
   िव ा     च  वाऽिव ा   ाहं   े दं  मम     वा।
   ब ः     च  वा  मो ः    प       िपता॥३॥
kva vidyā kva ca vā'vidyā kvāhaṁ kvedaṁ mama kva vā,
kva bandhaḥ kva ca vā mokṣaḥ svarūpasya kva rūpitā. (3)
   – where; िव ा – knowledge;    – where; च – and; वा – or; अिव ा –
ignorance;    – where; अहम्  – ‘I’;    – where; इदम्  – this; मम – my;  
– where; वा – or;    – where; ब ः  – bondage;    – where; च – and; वा
– or; मो ः  – Liberation;   प   – of my essential nature;    – where;
 िपता – attribute
3. Where is Knowledge and where is ‘ignorance’? Where is I? Where
is ‘this’ and where is ‘mine’? Where is bondage and where is
Liberation? Where is an attribute to the essential nature of my infinite
Self?
These terms are all valid only in the relative field. Where the mind is
not, how can the ego perceive an object as ‘this’? ‘Ignorance’ cannot
be in the infinite Knowledge and Knowledge itself cannot be an
attribute of the Self, when all delusions of ‘ignorance’ have ended!!
The ego, as the subject that experiences the world of objects, is
universally known in our bosom, expressing as the I-sense. Where
the subject is, that subject ego, through its equipments of body, mind
and intellect must perceive, feel, and think its world of perceptions,
emotions, and thoughts respectively. The ego experiences together
constitute our concept of the world. Thus, so long as the subject
exists, there cannot but be the ‘field of objects’ – the world. On
transcending the ego and experiencing the Self, how can there be
the sense of ‘I-ness’, and its misinterpretations which together form
the world!
This ego sense, ‘I-ness’, when it expresses out in the world of
objects, and relates itself with the world, becomes the ego feeling,
expressed as ‘my-ness’. Since the ego is itself transcended, the idea
of 'my-ness' has also retired. When the husband of my wife is no
more, my wife is also gone.
The Upaniṣad ṛṣis were not only adept in reaching the subtlest
states of unique spiritual experiences, but they were dexterous
technicians in communicating their wisdom to us and improvising a
variety of means by which we too can be safely transported onto
those divine realms of perfection. For this purpose, very often, they
had to fabricate terms and phrases, as tools in their sacred
profession.
The world of the ego and its behaviour in turn – all are
comprehended together by the term ‘ahantā’. Similarly, all possible
fields of experiences of the ego are together termed as the idam.
Idam means ‘this’ and the whole world of objects is the field defined
by the term ‘this-ness’ (idantā) if we may use such a term! That is the
reason why in the commentary we took the term ‘this’ (idam) as the
‘world of experiences’.
The sense of bondage and the sense of Liberation are both
conceived by the mind. Mind turned towards the sense objects is the
mind in ‘bondage’ and it is such a sad and miserable mind existing
ever in the sense pursuits that conceives and comprehends a state
of its own ‘Liberation’ from its own present thraldom. ‘To one who
has transcended the equipments and has thus blasted the ego,
which has now rediscovered its identity with the essential Self, how
can there be all these delusory misconceptions?’ asks the fully
Liberated Janaka.
Avadhūta-gītā unhesitatingly thunders: ‘I am never born neither
do I die. In me there is no activity, either good or bad. I am all pure
Brahman without any attributes. How then should there be in me
anything like bondage and Liberation?1
    ार ािन  कमा िण  जीव ु  रिप     वा।
   ति देहकै व  ं  िनिव शेष   सव दा॥४॥
kva prārabdhāni karmāṇi jīvanmuktirapi kva vā,
kva tad-videha-kaivalyaṁ nirviśeṣasya sarvadā. (4)
   – where;  ार ािन – commenced; कमा िण  – actions; जीवन्  मु  ः  –
Liberation in life; अिप – even;    – where; वा – or;    – where; तत्  –
that; िवदेहकै व म्  – Liberation at death; िनिव शेष   – undifferentiated;
सव दा – ever
4. Where are prārabdha karmas? Where is Liberation in life, and
where is even Liberation at death for me, the ever undifferentiated?
The actions always have their reactions. Good actions leave good
vāsanās in the personality, which in their turn create good thoughts
and, therefore, they will provide mental peace and inner joy. Evil
actions create evil vāsanās, which would generate mental
restlessness and the consequent inner sorrows. Already in the
Saṁhitā, to satisfy the common man who sees the Man of Perfection
functioning in the society, it was explained by Aṣṭāvakra that the
Liberated in life functions in the world outside under the impulsion of
the prārabdha of his body.
In these activities of his body, he is not at all involved and to drive
home this idea, the functions of the perfect man were compared with
the apparent movements of the dry leaf fallen from the tree and
moving about in the breeze! Now Janaka, the Liberated, from his
state of Selfhood, is denying even any prārabdha for himself. The
‘doer’ of the activities is the ego and reactions must come to the ego.
The murderer alone can be punished for his murder. The police may
apprehend a murderer but the law officer cannot serve the warrant of
arrest on the criminal, if, on the previous night, he had died!
No doubt, we cannot escape karma; actions will have their
reactions. But actions are undertaken by the ego; the reactions are
experienced by the same ego. One in whom the ego has been
transcended, the law of action and reaction must cease for him. The
criminal has deceased; the warrant of arrest is returned! The file is
closed! Janaka is confident that he has no prārabdha. He is now the
universal, the undifferentiated; the one who is ‘free from all
particularisation’ (nirviśeṣa).
As the pure infinite Self, immutable and all-pervading, as the very
substratum for the delusory universe of names and forms, Janaka
cannot understand either the state of the Liberated in life, nor the
state of the Liberated at death. He recognises no Liberation. He is
the Self, the ever perfect, never contaminated.
   कता      च  वा  भो ा  िन  यं    ु रणं     वा।
 ापरो ं  फलं  वा     िनः भाव   मे  सदा॥५॥
kva kartā kva ca vā bhoktā niṣkriyaṁ sphuraṇaṁ kva vā,
kvāparokṣaṁ phalaṁ vā kva niḥsvabhāvasya me sadā. (5)
   – where; कता  – doer;    – where; च – and; वा – or; भो ा – enjoyer;
िन  यम् – cessation of activities (thinking);   ु रणम्  – rising up of
thoughts;    – where; वा – or;    – where; अपरो म्  – direct
knowledge; फलम् – reflected knowledge; वा – or;    – where;
िनः भाव   – devoid of natural attributes (impersonal); मे – for me;
सदा – ever
5. Where is the ‘doer’ or the ‘enjoyer’? Where is the cessation of
thoughts or the rising of thoughts? Where is direct knowledge or
reflected knowledge for me, who am ever devoid of natural
attributes?
‘The natural attributes’ of a human being is that he is prompted
always by his ego and egocentric desires. He has an irresistible
fascination for the sense gratifications. He always lives a life of
duality constantly tossed between his likes and dislikes. The
Liberated in life is one who has freed himself from his ego and
egocentric desires. Therefore, in his behaviour, in the world outside,
we can define him only as one who is ‘devoid of his natural
attributes’ (niḥ svabhāva – svabhāva rahita).2
When the ego is no more functioning in the bosom, there cannot
be, in that individual, the sense of doership or ‘enjoyership’. Within
the mind-intellect the ego exists and functions. Where there is no
ego, the equipments are also transcended. Mind is the thought flow
and, therefore, to one who has transcended the mind and is living in
the Self, where is the cessation of thought or the rising of thought?
In every school of philosophy, it will have an elaborate theory of
how man comes to gain knowledge. Of them all, the theory of
Vedānta relating to perception and knowledge is most rational. Mind,
through sense organs, flows out to the place where the object is and
there the mind gets itself moulded into the shape of the object. The
ripple of disturbance so created in the mind, gets illuminated in the
light of Consciousness and then the individual considers that he has
seen and understood the object.
The knowledge of the object reaches our bosom as a disturbance
(vṛtti) which glows in the light of Consciousness (Caitanya). Hence
the knowledge of objects is called as ‘the final result’ (phala).3 The
very first impact of the sense stimuli upon our mind is to create a
disturbance therein (vṛtti). This then shines in the light of
Consciousness, ‘The final result’ (phala) is the ‘reflected knowledge’.
As a contrast to this reflected knowledge, which changes from
object to object, there is the ‘direct knowledge’ (aparokṣa jñāna)
which is the experience of the objectless Consciousness. One who
has realised the Self and lives in the Self, as the Self, since in its
non-dual infinitude, there are no objects other than Itself; the Man of
Realisation will not have any ‘reflected knowledge’. Those who are
struggling in the confusions of the ‘reflected knowledge’ must strive
hard to gain ‘direct knowledge’ in their personal experience of the
objectless pure Consciousness. The Liberated in life has become the
Consciousness Infinite, the Self and, therefore, where is ‘direct
knowledge’ for him?
In short, the Self-realised Master is no more human; he is not a
native of this relative world of ours; he is, in himself, the universal
Self, the Brahman. There is no other way of defining him.
   लोकः     मुमु ुवा      योगी   ानवान्     वा।
   ब ः     च  वा  मु ः     प ेऽहम ये॥६॥
kva lokaḥ kva mumukṣurvā kva yogī jñānavān kva vā,
kva baddhaḥ kva ca vā muktaḥ sva-svarūpe'ham-advaye. (6)
   – where; लोकः  – world;    – where; मुमु ुः  – aspirant for Liberation;
वा – or;    – where; योगी – man of contemplation;  ानवान्  – Man of
Realisation;    – where; वा – or;    – where; ब ः  – the bound man;  
– where; च – and; वा – or; मु ः  – the man Liberated; अहम ये
   प े – for me who am non-dual in nature
6. Where is the world and where is the seeker after Liberation?
Where is the man of contemplation and where is the Man of
Realisation? Where is the bound man and where is the Liberated
man for me, who am non-dual by nature?
In the unitive experience of the universal Self, wherein the subject-
object perceptions have all merged, the world, the seeker, man in
meditation, Man of Realisation, the bound man and the Liberated
man and so on, all have no significance and all efforts and
aspirations are totally nullified in the grand experience of the
universal Self, the one without a second. The awakened one
realises, ‘I am non-dual by nature’ and in this non-duality no other
concept of seeker, seeking and sought can ever exist.
   सृि ः     च  संहारः     सा ं     च  साधनम्।
   साधकः     िस  वा      प ेऽहम ये॥७॥
kva sṛṣṭiḥ kva ca saṁhāraḥ kva sādhyaṁ kva ca sādhanam,
kva sādhakaḥ kva siddhirvā sva-svarupe'ham-advaye. (7)
   – where; सृि ः  – creation;    – where; च – and; संहारः  – destruction
(withdrawing);    – where; सा म् – end;    – where; च – and; साधनम्
– means;    – where; साधकः  – the seeker;    – where; िस  ः  –
accomplishments; वा – or; अहम्  अ ये     प े – for me who am non-
dual by nature
7. Where is creation and where is destruction? Where is the end and
where is the means? Where is the seeker and where is the
accomplishment for me, abiding in my own non-dual nature?
Creation and destruction are concepts of the mind which projects in
its imagination the world of objects and withdraws those projections
when the perceived world is absorbed. This is what is happening
during the sleep of every individual. Macrocosmically conceived,
Lord Creator creates a universe and Lord of destruction withdraws or
absorbs the world into total dissolution called pralaya. The ego,
under the throes of its desires, gets agitated and the agitated mind
projects the world of experiences. When the mind is withdrawn from
its activities – may it be in sleep or samādhi – the contentious world
of conflicts and sorrows gets dissolved.
One, who has already realised the Self, which is one without a
second, has transcended his mind and, therefore, to him ‘Where is
creation and where is withdrawal?’ In this state it becomes amply
clear that there are no ‘means’ of Realisation (sādhanā) and there is
no ‘end’ for one who has already realised. The Man of Perfection is
no more a seeker (sādhaka) nor has he any accomplishment
(siddhi); He has become the very Self which is the substratum for all
accomplishments.
These two verses (6 & 7) together negate all pluralistic concepts,
which are natural for the human mind – creation-dissolution, means-
end, seeking-accomplishment, bound man and Liberated man – all
these are denied in the one non-dual Self. This reminds us how
Gauḍapāda has taken up this idea and elaborated it in his Kārikā
while discussing ‘the unreality of the objective world’. Says
Gauḍapāda: ‘There is neither dissolution, nor birth; neither anyone in
bondage nor any aspirant for wisdom; neither can there be any
seeker for Liberation, nor any Liberated as such. This alone is the
supreme Truth.’4
    माता   माणं  वा      मेयं     च   मा।
   िकि त्     न  िकि  ा  सव दा  िवमल   मे॥८॥
kva pramātā pramāṇaṁ vā kva prameyaṁ kva ca pramā,
kva kiñcit kva na kiñcidvā sarvadā vimalasya me. (8)
   – where;  माता – knower;  माणम्  – the means to knowledge; वा –
or;    – where;  मेयम्  – the object of knowledge;    – where; च – and;
 मा – objective knowledge;    – where; िकि त्  – something;    –
where; न  िकि त्  – nothing; वा – or; सव दा – ever; िवमल  – pure; मे –
for me
8. Where is the ‘knower’ and where is the ‘means to knowledge‘?
Where is the ‘object of knowledge’ and where is the objective
knowledge? Where is ‘anything’ and where is ‘nothing’ for me, who
am ‘ever pure’?
The Self is declared as ‘ever pure’, because it is not contaminated by
the illusory ‘misapprehensions’ of the equipments of experiences or
by their delusory world of experiences. As the Self is realised on
transcending the mind, the diseases and tragedies of the mind
cannot be there in the Self. Thus the ‘misapprehensions of the
Reality’ caused by the play of thoughts in the intellect and the
agitations of the mind created by the ‘rajas’, are both not in the Self
and, therefore, it is considered as ‘ever pure’ (guṇātīta). As there is
neither ‘rajas’ nor ‘tamas’, there is no ignorance of Reality and
naturally, the pure Consciousness is ever unconditioned by the
equipments of experiences (upādhi-rahita).
We have already pointed out the ‘theory of perception’ in
Vedānta.5 The technical terms used here are borrowed from our
scriptural texts. The knower ego (pramātā), its means of knowledge
(pramāṇam), the objects of knowledge (prameyam) and the final
result, objective knowledge (pramā) – all these are negated in the
objectless Consciousness, ever non-dual and immutable.
   िव ेपः     चैका ं     िनब धः     मूढता।
   हष ः     िवषादो  वा  सव दा  िन  य   मे॥९॥
kva vikṣepaḥ kva caikāgryaṁ kva nirbodhaḥ kva mūḍhatā,
kva harṣaḥ kva viṣādo vā sarvadā niṣkriyasya me. (9)
   – where; िव ेपः  – distraction;    – where; च – and; एका म्  –
concentration;    – where; िनब धः  – sure knowledge;    – where;
मूढता – delusion;    – where; हष ः  – joy;    – where; िवषादः  – sorrow;
वा – or; सव दा – ever; िन  य   – actionless; मे – for me
9. Where is distraction and where is concentration? Where is sure
knowledge and where is delusion? Where is joy and where is sorrow
for me, who am ever the actionless?
Where the mind is tossed about and is constantly gushing out into
the world of sense objects, seeking a fulfilment of its impetuous
desires of sense gratifications, there certainly, spiritual practice of
mental withdrawal is necessary. To call back the mind from its
association and indulgence with the world of objects is accomplished
by deliberate and wilful concentration of all its thoughts at the altar of
an inspiring Lord. Since there is no distraction in his state of
transcendence, to one who has realised the Self and since he is
living ever established in the Self, where is for him the need for
concentration?
When the intellect is veiled by ‘tamas’, the mind in its
restlessness imagines a world of plurality and, thereafter, the illusory
ego comes to yearn for the fancied possibilities of pleasure, joy and
satisfaction in the sense world. To live thus as a limited, crushed
entity, a slave to one’s own desires and thoughts, persecuted
constantly by the world of happenings around is the self-created
tragedy of one who is rotting in his own delusion. A Man of
Realisation is one who has awakened from the fancies of his mind,
conjured up by the delusions of his intellect. Therefore, he has no
more delusions. Since he has no false knowledge, nor wrong values,
he needs no true knowledge, firm and certain (nir-bodha). Here the
word employed by Aṣṭāvakra is an example of poetic licence.6
When the mind and the intellect are transcended, the sense of
ego gets automatically annihilated and, therefore, the vanity of
‘enjoyership’ cannot be in the Man of Perfection. ‘Where is joy or
sorrow?’ In the experience of the transcendental Reality of the Self,
which is one without a second, all-pervading and immutable, there
cannot be any action and as the Self Janaka here exclaims, ‘I am the
actionless and infinite Self!’
   चैष   वहारो  वा     च  सा  परमाथ ता।
   सुखं     च  वा  दुः खं  िनिव मश    मे  सदा॥१०॥
kva caiṣa vyavahāro vā kva ca sā paramārthatā,
kva sukhaṁ kva ca vā duḥkhaṁ nirvimarśasya me sadā. (10)
   – where; च – and; एषः  – this;  वहारः  – activities in the state of
relativity; वा – or;    – where; च – and; सा – that; परमाथ ता – the state
of the Absolute;    – where; सुखम् – happiness;    – where; च – and;
वा – or; दुः खम् – misery; िनिव मश    – devoid of all discursive thoughts;
मे – for me; सदा – ever
10. Where is activity in the state of relativity and where is the state of
the Absolute? Where is happiness and where is misery for me, who
am ever beyond any discursive thought?
The Self, the Brahman is beyond all cogent intellectual assessments.
All analytical discursive reasonings are possible only within the fields
of the world of plurality, conceived as objects of experiences of the
mind and intellect. Transcending the mind and intellect, none of
these activities of emotion and feeling, of analysis and reasoning can
reach the true state of the Self.
Established in the Self, the Liberated in life, has divorced himself
from all the equipments and, therefore, the Man of Realisation in
Janaka exclaims that He has neither any activity in the relative world
of plurality nor has he any sense any longer, in claiming his
identification with the absolute Self! The concept of the ‘Absolute’ is
but the other pole of the ‘relative’.
Beyond ‘happiness and misery’, unaffected by any of delusory
storms of the mind, created by its illusions of the world of objects,
shines the effulgent Self, which is the very essence and substance of
the Man of Realisation.
   माया     च  संसारः      ीितिव रितः     वा।
   जीवः     च  तद् -     सव दा  िवमल   मे॥११॥
kva māyā kva ca saṁsāraḥ kva prītirviratiḥ kva vā,
kva jīvaḥ kva ca tad-brahma sarvadā vimalasya me. (11)
   – where; माया – illusion;    – where; च – and; संसारः  – the world of
change;    – where;  ीितः  – attachments; िवरितः  – detachment;    –
where; वा – or;    – where; जीवः  – jīva;    – where; च – and; तत्  –
that;     – Brahman; सव दा – ever; िवमल  – pure (dirtless); मे – for
me
11. Where is illusion and where is the world of change? Where is
attachment and where is detachment? Where is jīva and what is
Brahman for me, who am ever pure?
In ‘Vivekacūḍāmaṇi’ Śaṅkarācārya elaborately proves and asserts,
there is no māyā nor ‘ignorance’ other than our own mind; the mind
is nothing but a grosser and, therefore, a more perceptible
expression of avidyā: ‘Apart from the mind there is no ignorance
(avidyā). The mind itself is the ‘ignorance’ which is the cause for the
bondage of rebirth. When the mind is destroyed, everything else is
destroyed. When mind manifests, everything else manifests’7.
The macrocosmic expression of ‘ignorance’ (avidyā) is the
concept of māyā, which maintains the illusion of the entire universe.
On transcending the mind, the vision and the experience change and
then viewed from the Self where is illusion, where is the world of
change?
Identified with the mind-intellect equipment, the light of
Consciousness assumes an apparent attitude of limitation and this
limited personality sense is ‘ego’ (jīva). The reflected sun in the
bucket disappears when the water is thrown out and the pool of light,
that was dancing in the bucket, merges back with the universal
sunlight. Similarly, when the waters of thoughts are dried up, the
mind is ended and the light of Consciousness that was ‘reflected’ in it
(cidābhāsa), the ‘ego’, disappears into the light of the universal Self.
This fact of spiritual life is fully endorsed by ‘Yogavāsiṣṭha’ when
it claims: ‘When all thought disturbances have ended, the purified
mind enters the state of one’s own pure Nature Divine and there, like
a drop that has entered the ocean, with all its desires gone, becomes
one with the Self’8.
To one who has thus realised the pure Self, thereafter, from his
standpoint where is jīva? And since there is no illusory egocentric
personality, to him what is the concept of Brahman? In short, the
verse here confirms the unequivocal assertion in the
Muṇḍakopaniṣad: ‘The knower of the Self becomes the Self. He who
knows that supreme Brahman becomes Brahman.’9
    वृि िन वृि वा      मु  ः     च  ब नम्।
कू ट थिनिव भाग     थ   मम  सव दा॥१२॥
kva pravṛttirnivṛttirvā kva muktiḥ kva ca bandhanam,
kūṭasthanirvibhāgasya svasthasya mama sarvadā. (12)
   – where;  वृि ः  – activity; िनवृि ः  – inactivity; वा – or;    – where;
मु  ः  – Liberation;    – where; च – and; ब नम्  – bondage;
कू ट थिनिव भाग  – immutable and indivisible;   थ   – established in
the Self; मम – for me; सव दा – ever
12. Where is activity? Where is inactivity? Where is Liberation? and
where is bondage for me, who am immutable and indivisible, and
ever established in the Self?
The seat of the essential Consciousness in an individual set of
equipments is indicated in the metaphorical term ‘kūṭasthaḥ’ by the
ṛṣis of Upaniṣad and the term indicates ‘That which remains (stha)
as an anvil (kuṭam)’. Very often the ṛṣis use such pictorial terms to
communicate to the students the nature and the function of the Self.
An anvil remains unchanged, although in contact with it, other pieces
of metal are hammered into different shapes. The body, mind and
intellect get hammered by the world of happenings around and total
personality of the individual gets constantly shaped and reshaped. In
this process, the steady Consciousness in the depth of our bosom
remains like an anvil ‘without itself changing, but at the same time
presiding over all changes’.
In short, the term ‘kūṭasthaḥ’ means that which remains
immutable in the midst of all mutations. The Man of Realisation is
one who has discovered and identified completely with this
immutable (kūṭasthaḥ) and indivisible (nirvibhāga) Self. As the
illuminating principle behind all activities of the body, mind and
intellect, It, in itself, is not involved in any activity nor can we declare
It as inactive. Activity and inactivity are the two states of the mind
and body. The Consciousness is neither active, nor inactive. It being
merely the Knowing Principle that illumines these two conditions into
our awareness.
The concepts of bondage and Liberation are different
experiences of the ego, depending upon how far it is involved and,
therefore, conditioned by the illusory vehicles and the delusory world
of plurality. The Self is merely the witness of both these conditions of
the ego and, therefore, Janaka readily declares, ‘Where is Liberation
or bondage for me, who am ever immutable and indivisible?’
Established in the Self, the royal sage has no identity other than
the Self. He has no impulsion to act as there is no ego or desire in
him. In the absence of the egocentric individuality in him he has no
duties from which he must, with exertion and suffering, learn to
withdraw!
 ोपदेशः     वा  शा ं     िश ः     च  वा  गु ः ।
   चा    पु षाथ   वा  िन पाधेः  िशव   मे॥१३॥
kvopadeśaḥ kva vā śāstraṁ kva śiṣyaḥ kva ca vā guruḥ,
kva cāsti puruṣārtho vā nirupādheḥ śivasya me. (13)
   – where; उपदेशः  – instruction;    – where; वा – or; शा म्  –
scripture;    – where; िश ः  – disciple;    – where; च – and; वा – or;
गु ः  – preceptor;    – where; च – and; अ   – is; पु षाथ ः  – goal of life;
वा – or; िन पाधेः  – free from limitations; िशव  – absolute good; मे –
for me
13. Where are instructions or where are scriptural injunctions?
Where is the disciple and where is the preceptor? Where, indeed, is
the 'goal of life' for me, who is the absolute Good (Śiva), free from all
limitations ?
The term ‘Śiva’ means the ‘supremely Blissful’ – the ‘Tranquil’ – the
‘Good’ – the ‘most Auspicious’. Lord Śiva is, considered in the
Paurāṇika literature as one of the trinities who is the Lord of
destruction. A spiritual seeker’s sole purpose is to destroy the ego
and the ‘non-apprehension of the Reality’ (avidyā) which is the cause
for it. Where this destruction is complete, the very Lord of
destruction, Śiva, alone remains. Hence, Lord Śiva is represented,
often, as the Lord of meditation. Though the term Śiva is not found in
the early Vaidika texts, later on it has been incorporated and
accepted as a term to indicate the pure infinite Self, which is the
substratum for the entire universe.
Here identifying with the Self within, Janaka declares in his Self-
realisation: ‘I am the absolute good – the supremely blissful – the
ever auspicious – Śiva, free from all limitations’.
To such an individual who has rediscovered his perfect identity
with the effulgent Self, which is pure Knowledge, of what use are
‘Teacher’s instructions or scriptures’ injunctions’? In the one
immutable Self where are the distinctions of the Teacher and the
taught? Very often we have noticed all along the Saṁhitā how,
describing and singing the joys of the Absolute, Sage Aṣṭāvakra
assumes an apparently blasphemic, shattering, iconoclastic mood
and temper, in his uncompromising experience of the non-dual
Reality. That is the sole reason why this textbook has been carefully
kept even in India, as a secret. In the hands of the unprepared
society it can blast the very basis of theology and religion, the very
dharma, that holds the community together and provides easy
stages therein for the individuals to grow in their evolution. The child
in the womb must patiently remain there for a full ten months, until it
has grown sufficiently to live under the atmospheric pressure and
profitably meet the challenges and experiences of the wider world
from the lap of its mother!
   चा       च  वा  ना     ा    चैकं     च   यम्।
ब नाऽ   िकमु  ेन  िकि  ोि  ते  मम॥१४॥
kva cāsti kva ca vā nāsti kvāsti caikaṁ kva ca dvayam,
bahunā'tra kimuktena kiñcinnottiṣṭhate mama. (14)
   – where; च – and; अ   – is;    – where; च – and; वा – or; न  अ    –
non-existing;    – where; अ   – is; च – and; एकम् – the one, unity;  
– where; च – and;  यम्  – duality; ब ना – much; अ  – here; िकम्  –
what need; उ  ेन – by saying; िकि त्  – anything; न – not; उि  ते –
emanates; मम – from me
14. Where is existence or where is ‘non-existence’? Where is the
one (unity) and where is duality? What need is there to say more?
Nothing indeed emanates from me.
In this concluding verse of the Saṁhitā, Aṣṭāvakra10 talks to the
world from the Self, as the Self. There is neither existence nor non-
existence. These two are the interpretations of the intellect. The Self
is the Consciousness that illumines our experiences. This
Consciousness can neither be called as ‘dual’ or ‘non-dual’ as these
concepts are true only in the relative world. These two are again
judgements of the intellect.
Having thus indicated, through a double process of denial and
assertion, the state of Selfhood all through the fourteen verses of this
chapter, Janaka feels exhausted and declares: ‘What need is there
to say anything more?’ He is concluding all his frail and ineffectual
explanations, so far given in reporting to his Teacher his inner
experience of the supreme state. In a crescendo of despair, in an
apparent hysterical screaming, Janaka roars with a spontaneity of an
ṛṣi of Upaniṣad: ‘Nothing indeed emanates from me’.
This statement is, no doubt repeatedly endorsed by many many
solid passsages in the entire literature relating to Upaniṣads but
nowhere is this brutal truth so vividly expressed and so courageously
declared, ever before, as we read it in the Aṣṭāvakra Saṁhitā. Hence
the special historical value for this little known, but very important,
Hindu mystic textbook.
As a mystic philosopher, Aṣṭāvakra is to be recognised, if not as
the father, certainly as the archangel and the guardian spirit of the
supreme advaitika theory of ‘Non-origination’ (ajāta-vāda). Later on it
was left for Śrī Gauḍapāda to elaborate this theory in his Kārikā to
Māṇḍūkya-upaniṣad.
Yogavāsiṣṭha also has elaborated upon this absolute standpoint
from wherein nothing has ever emerged in all the three periods of
time. The world of names and forms is an illusion created by the
restless mind. Says Yogavāsiṣṭha: ‘Though dwelling in the body,
since Self has no body, you are the bodiless pure Seer. Even though
wind moves in space, because of its perfect detachment, it is without
space?’11
This ultimate Truth is the transcendental Reality and, certainly, it
should be ever beyond all empirical speculations such as existence
and non-existence or as non-duality and duality. It is not to be
reached through the intellect by its reasoning, but it is a state to be
arrived at only through man's intuitive insight. To cultivate this
intuitive insight, all other sādhanās are necessary. Hence in
Kaivalyopaniṣad it is said: ‘Through Faith, devotion and meditation
you come to know It yourself’12.
Om Śāntiḥ ! Śāntiḥ! Śāntiḥ!
1 na jāto'haṁ mṛto va'pi na me karma śubhāśubhaṁ,
viśuddhaṁ nirguṇaṁ brahma bandho muktiḥ kathaṁ mama.
– Avadhūta-gītā-1.59
2 In the Jīvanmukti-gītā, Sage Dattātreya also, in same context, uses a very
expressive phrase (svabhāva guṇa varjitam).
3 viṣayākāra-vṛttyavacchinna-caitanyam ………. phalam.
4 na nirodho na cotpattirna baddho na ca sādhakaḥ,
na mumukṣurna vai mukta ityeṣā paramārthatā. – Māṇḍūkya-upaniṣad-2.32
5 Ibid – 20.5
6 ‘Nirbodha’ grammatically by its construction should mean ‘dullness of
understanding’. It is a poetic licence of a great philosopher, exploding in
inspired eloquence, that we should understand the word to mean ‘niścaya-
bodha – nir-bodha’, The meaning, ‘sure knowledge’ alone can here keep the
polarisation with ‘delusion’.
7 na hyastyavidyā manaso'tiriktā mano hyavidyā bhavabandhahetuḥ,
tasminvinaṣṭe sakalaṁ vinaṣṭaṁ vijṛmbhite'sminsakalaṁ vijṛmbhate.
– Vivekacūḍāmaṇi-169
8 vyapagatakalanākalaṅkaśuddhaḥ svayamamalātmani pāvane pade'sau,
salilakaṇa ivāmbudhau mahātmā vigalitavāsana ekatāṁ jagāma.
– Yogavāsiṣṭha
9 sa yo ha vai tat paramaṁ brahma veda bramaiva bhavati ………….
– Muṇḍakopaniṣad-3.2.9
10 Though this verse is in the mouth of Janaka, let us not forget that the
Saṁhitā declares Aṣṭāvakra’s philosophy and mysticism.
11 dehasaṁstho'pyadehatvādadeho'si videhadṛk,
vyomasaṁstho'pyasaktatvādavyomeva hi mārutaḥ. – Yogavāsiṣṭha-5.40.4
12 ..................
śraddhā-bhakti-dhyāna-yogādavaihi. – Kaivalyopaniṣad-2

Alphabetical Index to Slokas
Ch. Śl.
अकतृ  मभो  ृ  ं 18 51
अिक नः  कामचारो 18 87
अिक नभवं   ा  ं 13 1
अकु व  िप  सं ोभात् 18 58
अ यं  गतस ापम् 18 74
अिच ं  िच मानोऽिप 12 7
अत ादीव  कु  ते 18 26
अिन ं  सव मेवेदं 9 3
अ िव क शू   14 4
अ   कषाय  3 14
अ य ात्   य ा ा 18 34
अयं  सोऽहमयं  नाहिमित 18 9
अयं  सोऽहमयं  नाहं 15 15
अज िय ाऽ खलानथा न् 18 2
अथा नथ   न  मे    थ ा 13 5
अलं  ि वग कथया 19 8
अलमथ न  कामेन 10 7
अिवनािशनमा ानमेकं 3 1
असमाधेरिव ेपा  18 28
असंसार   तु   ािप 18 22
अहो  अहं  नमो  म मेकोऽहं 2 12
अहो  अहं  नमो  म ं  द ो 2 13
अहो  अहं  नमो  म ं  य  2 14
अहो  अहं  नमो  म ं  िवनाशो2 11
अहो  िच ा मेवाह 7 5
अहो  जनसमूहेऽिप 2 21
Ch. Śl.
अहो  िनर नः  शा ो 2 1
अहो  भुवनक ोलैः 2 23
अहो  िवक  तं  िव म् 2 9
अहं  कत  हंमान 1 8
अहं  वा  सव भूतेषु 6 4
अहं  स  शु  स ाशो 6 3
आकाशवदन ोऽहं 6 1
आच    णु  वा  तात 16 1
आ िव ा  तृ  ेन 18 93
आ ा ाना ग ाित 2 7
आ ा ानादहो   ीितिव षय 3 2
आ ानम यं  कि  ानाित 4 6
आ ा     ेित  िनि   18 8
आ ा  सा ी  िवभुः  पूण  1 12
आ ैवेदं  जग व  4 4
आपदः  स दः  काले 11 3
आ    पय   म् 11 7
आ    पय    े  भूत ामे 4 5
आयासात्  सकलो  दुः खी 16 3
आ माना मं   ानं 12 5
आ  थतः  परमा ैतं 3 6
इदं  कृ तिमदं  नेित 16 5
इहामु   िवर   3 8
ई रः  सव िनमा ता 11 2
उ  ृ ङ् खला कृ ितका 18 52
उदेित  भवतो  िव ं 5 2
उद् भूतं   ानदुिम  म 3 7
एक  एव  भवा ोधौ 15 18
एक    ये  शा े 15 13
Ch. Śl.
एका ता  िनरोधो  वा 18 33
एको    ाऽिस  सव   1 7
एको  िवशु बोधोऽहिमित 1 9
एकं  सव गतं   ोम 1 20
एवमेव  कृ तं  येन 12 8
कथं   ानमवा ोित 1 1
कत  त ैव  संसारो 18 57
कत  द ुः खमात   18 3
कम नै    िनब  भावा 13 4
कमा नु ानम ानात् 12 6
क ािप  तात  ध   9 2
कायकृ  ासहः  पूव  12 1
कु  ािप  खेदः  काय  13 2
कु  ािप  न  िजहासाऽ   18 23
कू ट थं  बोधम ैतमा ानं 1 13
कोऽसौ  कालो  वयः  िकं  वा 9 4
कृ तं  िकमिप  नैव   ािदित 13 3
कृ तं  देहेन  कम दं 18 25
कृ तं  न  कित  ज ािन 10 8
कृ ताकृ ते  च     ािन 9 1
कृ ताथ ऽनेन   ानेने  ेवं 17 8
कृ   ं  िकमिप  नैवा   18 13
कृ  ा  मूित प र ानं 9 6
   कता      च  वा  भो ा 20 5
   चा ा     च  वाऽना ा 19 4
   चा       च  वा  ना   20 14
   चैष   वहारो  वा 20 10
   तमः      काशो  वा 18 78
   दू रं     समीपं  वा 19 6
Ch. Śl.
   धनािन     िम ािण 14 2
   धम ः     च  वा  कामः 19 2
   धम ः     च  वा  कामः 18 12
   धैय      िववेिक ं 18 79
   िनरोधो  िवमूढ  18 41
    माता   माणं  वा 20 8
    वृि िन वृि वा  20 12
    ार ािन  कमा िण 20 4
   भूतं     भिव  ा 19 3
   भूतािन     देहो  वा 20 1
   माया     च  संसारः 20 11
   मोहः     च  वा  िव ं 18 14
   मृ  ुज िवतं  वा    19 7
   लोकः     मुमु ुवा  20 6
   िव ेपः     चैका ं 20 9
   िव ा     च  वाऽिव ा 20 3
   शा ं   ा िव ानं 20 2
   संसारः     चाभासः 18 66
   सृि ः     च  संहारः 20 7
     ः     सुषु  वा  19 5
    ा    ं     स ोचः 18 92
 ा नो  दश नं  त  18 40
 ोपदेशः     वा  शा ं 20 13
गुणैः  संवेि तो  देहः 15 9
िच या  जायते  दुः खं 11 5
चे मानं  शरीरं    ं 3 10
जान िप  न  जानाित 18 90
 ः  सिच ोऽिप  िनि  ः 18 95
 ानं   ेयं  तथा   ाता 2 15
Ch. Śl.
 ाना िलतकमा   यो 18 77
त    पु पापा ा ं 4 3
तदा  ब ो  यदा  िच ं  िकि त् 8 1
तदा  ब ो  यदा  िच ं  स  ं 8 3
तदा  मु  य दा  िच ं 8 2
त ुमा ो  भवेदेव 2 5
त  ं  यथाथ माक   18 32
त िव ानस ंशम् 19 1
तवैवा ानतो  िव ं 15 16
तात  िच ा  पोऽिस 15 12
तुि ः  सव    धीर  18 85
तृ ामा ा को  ब ः 10 4
तेन   ानफलं   ा  ं 17 1
 जैव   ानं  सव   15 20
 मेक ेतनः  शु ो 10 5
 या   ा िमदं  िव ं 1 16
  न महा ोधौ 15 11
  ो  येना िव ेपो 18 17
देह   तु  क ा  ं 15 10
देहािभमानपाशेन 1 14
 ैतमूलमहो  दुः खं 2 16
धमा धम   सुखं  दुः खं 1 6
धमा थ काममो ेषु 17 6
धीर ु  भो मानोऽिप 3 9
धीरो  न   ेि   संसारम् 18 83
धीरो  लोकिवपय  ो 18 18
न  कदािच ग   न् 17 2
न  जागित   न  िन ाित 17 10
न  जातु  िवषयाः  के ऽिप 17 3
Ch. Śl.
न  ते  स ोऽ    के नािप 5 1
न    ं  देहो  न  ते  देहो 15 4
न    ं  िव ािदको  वण  1 5
न  दू रं  न  च  स ोचात् 18 5
न  धावित  जनाकीण  18 100
न  िन ित  न  च   ौित 17 13
न  पृ ी  न  जलं  नाि न  1 3
न   ीयते  व  मानो 18 99
न  मु  का रकां  ध े 18 47
न  मु ो  िवषय े ा 17 17
न  मे  ब ोऽ    मो ो 2 18
न  िव ेपो  न  चैका ं 18 10
न  शा ं   ौित  िन ामो 18 82
न  शा  ं  लभते  मूढो 18 39
न  सुखी  न  च  वा  दुः खी 18 96
न   ग   नैव  नरको 18 80
न  िहंसा  नैव  का   ं 17 16
ना ा  भावेषु  नो  भावः 7 4
नाना  मतं  महष णां 9 5
नानािवचारसु ा ो 18 27
नाना य िमदं  िव ं 11 8
ना ोित  कम णा  मो ं 18 36
नाहं  देहो  न  मे  देहो  जीवो 2 22
नाहं  देहो  न  मे  देहो  बोधः 11 6
िनरपे ो  िनिव कारो 1 17
िनराधारा   ह  ाः 18 38
िनरोधादीिन  कमा िण 18 75
िन ा तुं  चेि तुं  वािप 18 31
िनम मो  िनरह ारो 17 19
Ch. Śl.
िनम मः  शोभते  धीरः 18 88
िनवृ ि रिप  मूढ  18 61
िनवा सनं  ह रं     ा 18 46
िनवा सनो  िनराल ः 18 21
िनःस ो  िन  योऽिस 1 15
िनः  ेहः  पु दारादौ 18 84
िनः  ृहं  मानसं  य  3 12
नैव   ाथ यते  लाभं 18 81
नोि  ं  न  च  संतु म् 18 30
पततूदेतु  वा  देहो 18 86
प र हेषु  वैरा ं 18 62
प   भूतिवकारां  ं 9 7
प न ्    न ्    ृशन् 17 12
 काशो  मे  िनजं   प ं 2 8
 कृ  ा  शू िच   18 24
 कृ  ा  शू िच ो  यः 14 1
   म व  ु ा 5 3
 वृ ौ  जायते  रागो 16 8
 वृ ौ  वा  िनवृ ौ  वा 18 20
 ी भावेन  श ादेः 12 2
ब ना   िकमु  ेन 18 68
बु  पय  संसारे 18 73
बुभु ु रह  संसारे 17 5
बोधमा ोऽहम़  ानात् 2 17
भवोऽयं  भावनामा ो 18 4
भावनाभावनास ा 18 63
भाव   भावकः  कि   18 42
भावाभाविवकार  11 1
भावाभाविवहीनो  य  ृ ो 18 19
Ch. Śl.
िभ ुवा   भूपितवा िप 18 91
भृ  ैः  पु ैः  कल ै  18 55
भोगं  कम समािधं  वा 16 2
 मभूतिमदं  सव  18 70
 ा  मा िमदं  िव ं 15 17
म ो  िविनग तं  िव ं 2 10
मनः   काशसंमोह 17 20
महदािद  जग ् वैतं 18 69
महोदिध रवाहं  स 6 2
म ः   ु ािप  त   ु 18 76
म न महा ोधावा य  2 25
म न महा ोधौ  िच वाते 2 24
म न महा ोधौ  िव पोत7 1
म न महा ोधौ  जग ीिचः7 2
म न महा ोधौ  िव ं 7 3
मा  स  िवक ा ा ं 15 19
मायामा िमदं  िव ं 3 11
मु ािभमानी  मु ो  िह 1 11
मु  िम िस  चे ात 1 2
मु ो  यथा  थित  थः 18 98
मूढो  ना ोित  त   18 37
मुमु ोबु   राल म् 18 44
मो ो  िवषयवैर  ं 15 2
य   य   भवे ृ ा 10 3
य   िव िमदं  भाित 1 10
य दं   े वो  दीनाः 4 2
यथातथोपदेशेन 15 1
यथा  न  तोयतो  िभ ाः 2 4
यथा   काशया ेको 2 2
Ch. Śl.
यथैवादश म  थे 1 19
यथैवे ुरसे    ृ ा 2 6
यदा  नाहं  तदा  मो ो 8 4
यदा  य त ु मायाित 18 49
यिद  देहं  पृथ  ृ   1 4
य  ं  प िस  त ैकः 15 14
य  ु  भोगेषु  भु  ेषु 17 4
य   बोधोदये  तावत् 18 1
य ा ः   ादह ारो 18 29
य ािभमानो  मो ेऽिप 16 10
येन    ं  परं     18 16
येन  िव िमदं    ं 18 15
राग ेषौ  मनोधम  15 5
रा  ं  सुताः  कल ािण 10 6
व  ु वणमा ेण 18 48
वा   ा महो ोगं 15 3
वा ा  न  िव िवलये 17 7
वासना  एव  संसार 9 8
िव ेपेऽिप  न  िवि  ः 18 97
िव ाते  साि पु षे 14 3
िवर ो  िवषय े ा 16 6
िवलस    महाभोगैः 18 53
िव ं    ु रित  य ेदं 3 3
िव ं    ु रित  य ेदं 15 7
िवषया ीिपनो  वी  18 45
िवहाय  वै रणं  काममथ  10 1
 ापारे   ख ते  य  ु 16 4
 ामोहमा िवरतौ 18 6
शरीरं   ग  नरकौ 2 20
Ch. Śl.
शु  ं  बु  ं  ि यं  पूण  18 35
शु म यमा ानं 18 43
शु   ु रण प  18 71
शू ा   ि वृ था  चे ा 17 9
     तात      15 8
 ु ाऽिप  शु चैत म् 3 4
 ोि यं  देवतां  तीथ म् 18 54
स  एव  ध   आ  ः 18 65
स  जय थ सं ासी 18 67
स ु ोऽिप  न  स ु ः 18 56
समदुः खसुखः  पूण  5 4
सम ं  क नामा म् 18 7
समाधानासमाधान - 17 18
समा ासािदिवि  ौ 12 3
सव      त े    थः 17 11
सव  ानवधान   न 18 89
सव भूतेषु  चा ानं 3 5
सव भूतेषु  चा ानं 15 6
सवा र  ेषु  िन ामो 18 64
सशरीरमहो  िव ं  प र   2 3
सशरीरिमदं  िव ं  न  िकि त् 2 19
सानुरागां    यं     ा 17 14
सुखदुः खे  ज मृ  ू 11 4
सुखमा े  सुखं  शेते 18 59
सुखािद पािनयमं 13 7
सुखे  दुः खे  नरे  नाया  17 15
सु ोऽिप  न  सुषु ौ  च 18 94
  ु रतोऽन  पेण 18 72
 पतो  ना    मे  हािनः 13 6
Ch. Śl.
   े जालवत्  प  10 2
साकारमनृतं  िव   1 18
 भावादेव  जानानो 3 13
 भावा    नैवाित ः 18 60
 ात  ात्  सुखमा ोित 18 50
 ारा  े  भै व ृ ौ  च 18 11
ह ा     धीर  4 1
हरो  यद् युपदे ा  ते 16 11
हातुिम ित  संसारं 16 9
हेयोपादेयता  तावत् 16 7
हेयोपादेयिवरहादेवं 12 4
Note : Where first line is identical in more than one śloka, to enable readers to
distinguish and locate the right śloka, first word of the second line is given
within brackets.

