MANDUKYA UPANISHAD
An ancient Sanskrit text on the nature of Reality 
James Swartz 
© 1996 
MANDUKYA UPANISHAD
Vedic culture is based on the Vedas,1 books of knowledge of great 
antiquity.  The four Vedas are divided into three parts.  The mantras, the 
earliest portion, are hymns to the power of nature which is seen as a kind, 
tolerant and merciful, yet mighty, severe, and unrelenting deity.  The 
Brahmanas, are detailed instructions needed to perform rituals and 
meditations that produce certain sought-after and limited results: wealth, 
progeny, a happy afterlife, health, etc.  Such knowledge is valuable for those 
who believe that happiness comes from outside themselves.   
A few of us doubt that lasting happiness comes from the pursuit of 
desired objects and/or the performance of finite activities, religious or 
otherwise, in a time-bound world and, for whatever reasons, are convinced 
that happiness comes from within.  The Aranyakas or Upanishads, the third 
portion of each Veda, commonly known as Vedanta, agrees and delivers an 
“absolute” 
2  knowledge that, under the right circumstances, reveals the 
limitless blissful Self and destroys the suffering arising from the belief in 
oneself as a limited being.  
Actions, subtle and gross, can only produce things not immediately 
available.  For example, if I live in San Francisco and want to go to New 
York I need to catch a plane, or drive a car.  But the Self, the limitless I, our 
true identity, is eternally present, the nearest of the near, so no action will 
help me reach it. 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
2 
One day a devotee said to God, “Please give me a head on my 
s
houlders.”  
God thought long and hard about the request and concluded that, in 
spite of His omnipotence, He could do nothing.  So He said to the devotee, 
“I can give you another fatter head.  I can move your present head to a 
different location.  I can shrink or expand your head.  I can put a dozen 
heads on top of your head.  I can twist your head into the shape of a pretzel. 
But I cannot give you a head on your shoulders because you have a head on 
your shoulders.” 
“So what should I do?” the devotee asked. 
“I think the only way to solve the problem is to realize that you 
already have a head on your shoulders,” said the Lord. 
*** 
I can only get something I already have through knowledge. 
But knowledge doesn’t happen by itself.  It must come through a 
vehicle or instrument.     
THE MEANS OF KNOWLEDGE
Perception, inference, and language are means of knowledge.  The 
m
eans of knowledge we use is determined by the type of object we want to 
know.  For example, if I want to see a sunset I can’t use my ears.  
Knowledge of thought depends on intellect.  To understand feelings I should 
have a heart.   
The means of knowing relative things is obvious, but the knowledge 
revealing the limitless I is subtle because it has to remove a deep and hidden 
obstacle, the ignorance of my limitless nature. 
For the means to operate properly, assuming a clear message is 
coming from the scripture through the teacher, the mind must be trained to 
listen.
3   Listening with an open mind requires disciplined and consistent 
setting aside of cherished views of oneself and world.  A means of 
knowledge is not brainwashing, accepting a new belief system; its only 
purpose is to deliver of a clear vision of truth, the limitless I.  
Simply hearing that one is free of limitation is not enough.  Doubt 
comes from incomplete and incorrect thinking and is only removed by 
careful and patient reflection
   Meditation as a thought-free state or religious 
ritual as devotional practice are valuable tools for purifying the mind, but 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 3 
will not remove self doubt.  So, along with the knowledge that I am limitless 
Awareness, I should follow the method of thinking enjoined by the scripture, 
the negation of all incorrect views about the nature of the world and myself. 
 The most formidable obstacle to the assimilation  of the truth is the 
thought “If only I were different or the world were different, I would be 
happy.”  Looking forward to an ideal inner or outer situation is futile 
because life and oneself is already and always perfect.  When this thought is 
removed the mind enjoys limitless vision.  So spiritual practice, meditation if 
you will, is the struggle to purify beliefs supporting the notion of oneself as a 
limited being.  
 Words can only reveal known objects.  For example, the word 
‘television’ wouldn’t have been understood a hundred years ago.  Words 
only work to describe substances, properties of substances, actions, species 
or classes, and relationships, so how can the limitless I, which is apparently 
not an experienced object and obviously beyond these categories, be 
revealed through the teachings of Vedanta? 
 If I say “tree,” a tree thought takes place in the mind because we have 
experienced trees, but the words “limitless I” don’t mean anything to most of 
us because we think of our ourselves as limited I’s.  And the limitless I is the 
part of ourselves that can never be objectified, so it seems words won’t work 
to reveal it.  However, if the thought that we’re limited is a delusion and the 
limitless I  present and accounted for, an intimate part of every transaction, 
words can reveal it.  
 Vedanta tackles the word problem by first informing me that I’m an 
unlimited I.  That I’m limitless is indicated by the fact that though I have 
literally hundreds of thousands of unique experiences in my lifetime, I 
continually experience myself as a simple conscious being, one transcending 
all experiences.  The same I, unaffected by time, witnessed my baby body, 
youth body, adult body, and feeble old-age body and their myriad 
transactions. 
 
WHAT LIMITLESSNESS DOESN’T MEAN 
 
 To say we’re unlimited by nature does not mean that if we knew who 
we were we could walk on water, fly like birds, or leap tall buildings in a 
single bound like Superman.  Nor does it mean that we are omniscient, 
endowed with extraordinary psychic powers, capable of zipping around the 
cosmos in our spirit bodies.  With rare exceptions, the body and mind are 
limited by Nature and behave in conformity with its laws.  And one could 
hardly imagine a more limited phenomenon than a miracle.   
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 4 
 A common example of limitlessness is the “peak” experience when 
the sense of limitation temporarily dissolves and the person feels completely 
happy, carefree, peaceful, loving, rich, and powerful.  In deep sleep we 
experience limitless and bliss.  Though seemingly a momentary feeling, 
limitlessness is the most fundamental fact of our existence, our own 
forgotten nature.  That it’s our nature is indicated by the fact that whenever I 
feel this way I never try to rid myself of the experience, unlike limitation, 
which I always view as a serious disease. 
 Though it’s my nature I don’t see myself as limitless because I’m 
identified with my limited selves.  Not to put too fine a point on it, when I 
negate and cease to identify with my relative selves, (which is the purpose of 
this Upanishad) my non-negatable limitless Self is (hopefully) realized by 
default.  The rediscovery of oneself as a limitless awareful Being is known 
as liberation6 or enlightenment.  
 The trick lies in recognizing oneself as limitless awareness without 
turning oneself into an object.  When we turn ourselves into objects we 
suffer.  In a dream a man decided to try to find his waking self and looked 
high and low with no success.  Dejected, he sat down under a tree when he 
heard a voice from the sky say, “Why don’t you wake up.”   
 Surrendering his status as a dreamer and leaving the dream world, he 
discovered the waker by becoming the waker without turning himself into an 
object.  In fact, the dreamer was the waker, temporarily identified with the 
conditions in the dream world.  Similarly, from the point of view of the 
limitless I, all waking state entities are consciously or unconsciously 
searching the limitless I in a state that doesn’t contain it as an object .  The 
only way we are going to discover what we’re searching is to awaken from 
this waking dream. 
 In the twilight a thirsty traveler approached a village well.  Reaching 
down, she recoiled in fear when she saw a big snake coiled next to the 
bucket.  Unable to move for fear of being bitten, she imagined terrible 
things, including her own death.  At that time an old man coming to the well 
noticed her predicament. 
 “What’s the problem?” he asked kindly. 
 “Snake! Snake! Get a stick before it strikes!” she whispered 
frantically. 
 The old man burst out laughing. “Hey!” he said, “Take it easy.  That’s 
no snake.  It’s the well rope.  It just looks like a snake in the darkness.” 
 Though never in danger, the misapprehended rope produced intense 
fear.  Our existential fears and desires come from mistaking the limitless I 
for the limited I.  The fear of the snake arose simultaneously with the 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 5 
misapprehension of the rope and, significantly, vanished when the rope was 
correctly perceived. 
 In the Mandukya Upanishad, an English rendition of which is given 
below, the rope represents the limitless I and the snake the limited I broken 
into three sub-I’s: the waker, dreamer, and sleeper and their respective 
worlds.8   In the story, the traveler, who represents anyone striving to know 
who they are, makes a mistake and sees a snake where there is only a rope.  
This superimposition9 of our limited self or selves on our real or limitless I 
(which is going on all the time) is the cause of much suffering.  The removal 
of this error is the purpose of the Upanishad.  
 This mistake, a symbol of normal perception, took place in twilight, 
which represents the waking entity’s partially-conscious state of mind.  In 
broad daylight (full knowledge) or pitch darkness (total ignorance) no such 
error could have occurred.  Because we’re so obsessed with the objects of 
perception and the limited I’s reactions to them, in normal perception we 
vaguely or incompletely see the limitless I even though it’s an intimate part 
of every transaction.  And we are unaware that the snake needs the rope, 
borrows its reality from the rope.  Meaning that my life exists because I 
exist, not the other way around.  Even if we are superficially aware of our 
Consciousness we don’t understand that deep inquiry into it confers freedom 
and endless bliss.  Our story has a happy ending because the snake 
disappears into the rope and the traveler’s suffering ceases.  In reality, the 
disappearance of the snake, all our false conceptions and discriminations, 
except in exceptional cases, comes about after long and patient inner work.    
 The aim of the Mandukya is to analyze the creation 10 and arrive at 
truth, the limitless I.  But the analysis of the creation, as modern science will 
testify is daunting because every advance in knowledge opens up a new area 
of ignorance.  So the Upanishad takes a shortcut.  By equating the limitless I, 
Consciousness, with the world, as it does in the first mantra…“The whole 
cosmos is the word AUM ”…we come to understand the world by inquiring 
into the Self.   
 The world as we know it is not a strange Sanskrit term.  Physically we 
see it as matter, the elements in various permutation combinations, and 
psychologically we understand it as subtle matter: thought, feeling, 
perception, knowledge, memory, dreams, fantasies, etc. 
 In what sense is everything we experience the word AUM?  
 Words are sound symbols.  Of what is AUM the symbol?  Modern 
science tells us that matter is just energy in a state of motion, vibration.  The 
energy that becomes different types of matter by vibrating at different 
frequencies is symbolized in Vedic science as AUM because, it is said, this 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 6 
sound encompasses all the sounds the voice box is capable of creating.  
While the idea is logical, the fact that mind and matter are vibrating energy, 
not the symbol, concerns us here.  
 What is the nature of this energy?  Just as matter is energy in a state of 
vibration, energy is Consciousness apparently vibrating.  While energy is a 
moving form of Consciousness, Consciousness itself is energyless, all-
pervasive, and unmoving.  So how does the unmoving Consciousness, 
AUM, become dualistic, capable of movement?   The best explanation I’ve 
found is that from Consciousness’ point of view there is no dualistic, 
vibrating, energy-filled universe.  But from the point of view of a mind, seen 
through a vibrating mind, the universe apparently dances.   
 Nonetheless, because our bodies and minds are insentient matter, they 
can only be moved by something else.  And that something else is 
Consciousness.  The materialist view, which has arisen because the senses 
are taken as the sole means of knowledge, that mind evolved from matter is 
patently illogical since evolution implies a conscious agent.  Though 
unmoving by nature, Consciousness is capable of inspiring movement in Its 
vehicles.  
 Are the vehicles different from Consciousness?  Is the spider different 
from its web?  Though apparently different from the spider, the web, being 
part and parcel of the spider, is non-separate from it.  It is the spider minus 
the intelligence to create and manipulate its creation.  Likewise the universe, 
AUM, though apparently a vast field of vibrating subtle and gross matter, is 
nothing but subtle and gross forms of Consciousness.  How far, the sages 
say, is the wave from the ocean?  
 Seen through the filter of time the limitless I is said to be the cause of 
which the universe is an effect.  Is the cause separate from its effect?  The 
effect is the cause in a different form, just as a pot is not separate from the 
mud that sustains it.  If we are little pots of consciousness how far can we be 
from the Consciousness that sustains us?  How far can we be from the 
Consciousness that sustains all pots?  
 In this sense, the whole universe is Consciousness, symbolized by the 
word “AUM.” 
 The Mandukya’s definition of AUM, the limitless I, is:  “ That which 
exists in all periods of time, past, present and future, before the past and 
after the future.” And we can add a secondary definition:  That which 
exists in all states of consciousness and beyond is AUM.  Anything not 
conforming to this definition isn’t real.  Experienceable, yes, temporarily 
existent, but only seemingly real.  Since all forms of Consciousness, mind 
and matter, don’t fit the definition, for the purpose of someone striving for 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 7 
Self knowledge they are not the limitless I.  To discover myself as the 
limitless I, I have to see who I am minus the body and mind.  When I’m one 
hundred percent convinced I’m the limitless I alone, I can take back the 
forms without suffering limitation.  
 Since only one I fits the definition and It is present and accounted for, 
its analysis is straightforward.  If, for example, I wish to understand the 
nature of water I needn’t drink from every river, lake, and ocean in the 
world.  I need only analyze one drop.  If the creation is the limitless I, I need 
only inquire into myself to find out the nature of everything.  
  
THE WAKER, DREAMER, AND DEEP SLEEPER 
 
 As human beings we have three ‘egos’ or experiencing entities.  The 
first, the waking state ego, (See the bottom left third of fig.1) is 
Consciousness12 , the limitless Self, shining through the body-mind-intellect 
bundle experiencing the world of material objects and the subtle world of 
feelings, emotions, thoughts, ideas, memories, etc.  
 
 
 
fig. 1 
 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 8 
Everyone primarily views his or herself as a waker.  When I say “me” in 
conversation, I am referring to myself as a waking state entity.  The belief 
that I am a waker, and, as our analysis will show, it is only a belief, comes 
with the conviction that the waking state physical, emotional, and 
intellectual objects are real.   
 The waker’s consciousness is turned outward, the Self shining through 
the senses, mind, intellect, illumining their respective objects.  When 
idealistic metaphysics claims there is no world apart from the perceiver, it is 
simply saying that the Self doesn’t see a world unless it shines through the 
body, mind or intellect, not that the physical world doesn’t exist.  Though 
existing independently of the waker’s perceptions, it doesn’t exist apart from 
Consciousness, the Self.  
 The waker, vishwa, is a consumer of experience.  The Sanskrit 
literature describing the waker calls it “the one with thirteen mouths.” 13   The 
“thirteen mouths refer to the ten senses, mind, intellect, and ego.  These 
instruments are mouths in that, powered by the momentum of past 
experiences, they aggressively seek experience in the present.  The physical 
body consumes matter, the five elements14  in various permutation 
combinations; the mind constantly chews emotion; the intellect eats ideas; 
and the ego gobbles any experience it believes will make it feel whole, 
adequate, and happy.   
 The dreamer, ( the lower right side of fig.1) consciousness turned 
inward,15  enjoys a world similar in some respects to the waking state world 
and radically different in others.  In the dream state The Self illumines only 
subtle objects, a replay of the vasanas16  (note the small “v’s” circling the Self 
in the waking and dream states.17 ) gathered in the waking state expressing in 
pictorial form.  In the waking state the vasanas express as the waker’s 
thoughts and feelings.  Like the waker, the dreamer believes he or she and 
his or her world is real.  The dreamer is equipped with the same instruments 
for experience as the waker: dream senses to consume dream objects, a 
dream mind to emote and feel, a dream intellect to think dream thoughts, and 
a dream ego to go about the business of experiencing the dream life.18   The 
dreamer is referred to in the Upanishad as taijaisa, the “shining one,” a term 
indicating its nature as Consciousness.  All dreams appear in light, even 
though the waking senses are inactive, because the Self, Consciousness, is 
shining through the dreamer, just as it shines through the waker.  
 Sleep is defined as the state, saturated with happiness, where one loses 
consciousness, doesn’t desire any external objects, doesn’t see any internal 
objects, and is both Self and self-ignorant.  
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 9 
 The sleeper is called pragna or mass of consciousness.  In the other 
states consciousness flows outward and inward but in sleep it looses 
direction and becomes formless.  The sleeper ego is extremely subtle, its 
presence indicated by the fact that we experience limitlessness and bliss.  In 
the waking and dream states bliss is sporadic because it is broken by many 
divisions of thought and feeling.  We know of the sleeper’s experience 
because it reports a good sleep after transforming into a waker.  Were the 
waker actually a different ego from the sleeper, or the dreamer, it wouldn’t 
recall the experience of sleep or dream.  
 The deep sleep state is free of both waking and dream egos and 
objects because the vasanas projecting them have become dormant; hence it 
is referred to as the “seed” state.  When the “seeds” sprout, one becomes a 
waker or a dreamer and experiences the appropriate world. 
 Because we don’t remember being conscious in it, the sleep state is 
often thought to be a void by metaphysicians and philosophers.  In fact 
Sanskrit literature refers to it as ‘the womb,’ because our waking and dream 
worlds emerge from it.  When you wake up in the morning your whole life is 
neatly laid out consistent with the day before, the same language you spoke 
yesterday on the tip or your tongue, indicating that previous experience had 
simply entered a dormant state.  The dormant potential of the sleep state 
containing the macrocosmic vasanas19  is called Ishwara, the Creator, in 
Vedantic literature.  With reference to the microcosmic vasanas20  the sleeper 
is called pragnya.  
 The sleep state is also known as the gateway between the waking and 
the dream states because it functions as a kind of closet with two doors 
where the dreamer can don the guise of the waker to appear on the waking 
stage.  And vice versa.  Though a minor point, even in cases where one 
seems to be awakened directly out of a dream by a noise, for example, the 
dreamer passes through the sleep state.  A motion picture image of a 
stationary object is actually dozens of individual images passing so fast they 
seem to be a solid object.  Similarly, we can’t trust our experience in this 
case because the change is so fast we don’t notice it. 
 Though they seem so, the three selves are not actually separate entities 
but apparently distinct entities created when the limitless I associates with a 
given state of consciousness.  Associated with the waking state, the Self 
‘becomes’21 a waking state personality, suffering and enjoying as the case 
may be, the limitations of the physical world, the senses, mind, intellect, 
ego, unconscious, and self-ignorance.  The dreamer suffers the limitations of 
the mind, the unconscious, and self-ignorance.  And the sleeper, the Self 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 10 
apparently merged into the unconscious, suffers only self-ignorance and 
limitless bliss.  
 These three states and egos are known to everyone and constitute the 
totality of the limited I’s experience.  An interesting question posed by this 
analysis, and the point of the Upanishad, is “Who am I?”   If I’m the waking 
ego, which I’ve been totally convinced I am, what happens to me when I 
become a sleeper?  I willingly surrender everything essential to my idea of 
myself (my body, mind, intellect, and all my physical possessions) and turn 
into a mass of limitless Consciousness22 .   
 Yet I don’t seem to be content as a sleeper ego, the blissfully ignorant 
subtle being, because I sacrifice that status to suffer and enjoy the world 
created by my vasanas in waking or dream states.   My dreamer identity is 
obviously equally insufficient because I always leave it to become a sleeper.  
So my status as any one ego or ego aspect is limited and my true identity 
open to question. 
 Furthermore, if identity is happiness, any ego identity is limited since 
the happiness experienced in sleep disappears in the waking state.  Dream 
happiness dissolves on waking, and waking happiness cannot be transported 
into sleep or dream. 
 
IF I’M REAL I HAVE TO EXIST ALL THE TIME 
  
 The answer to “Who am I” is that I am not any of these egos or ego 
states.  If I’m real I have to exist all the time.  I can’t suddenly be one thing 
one minute and something else the next; I experience life as a simple single 
complete conscious being.  In fact I exist in the waking, dream, and deep 
sleep states independent of the waker, dreamer and deep sleeper. 
  As what? 
  As the limitless I, the Awareness, the common factor and witness 23  to 
the three states.  (Note in fig.1 that the Self, the white circle in the center of 
all the states, exists in all three states without modifying it’s nature.)  
Outside of meditation,24  the Self is probably easiest to recognize in the dream 
state because the physical senses are inactive.  The dream is playing on the 
screen of the mind like a movie and even though physical light is absent and 
the eyes closed, the dream ego and the events in which it is participating are 
clearly illumined, a phenomenon referred to as “lucid” dreaming.  The 
lucidity is the limitless I temporarily functioning as the dreamer, “the 
shining one.” However, identification with the dream ego and its doings 
prevents us from properly appreciating the dream light, the Self. 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 11 
 The Self is unknown in the waking state for the same reason.  
Preoccupied with the happenings in our worlds and minds, we are 
completely unaware that both the sense objects and our thoughts and 
feelings are bathed in the subtle light of Awareness. 
 In deep sleep the ego/intellect is dissolved into its source, the dormant 
seeds of its past actions, so it isn’t aware of either the Self or anything 
external. 
 The three ego’s are called upahdis, limiting adjuncts, in Vedanta.  An 
upadhi is something that apparently covers or conceals the nature of 
something else.  If I put clear water in a colored glass, the water, seen 
through the glass, appears colored.  Similarly when I look at myself through 
my waking, dream, and sleep personalities, I seem to be three distinct 
personalities.   However, when I remove the upadhi I can see what I really 
am.  The removal or negation of the upahdis is simply knowing they are 
unreal, not going into some high or “spiritual” state to get rid of them.  The 
Yoga shastra25  says liberation depends on destruction of the mind but 
Vedanta says that the more one struggles to remove the thoughts the more 
one lends them reality, reinforcing one’s Self ignorance. 
 The waker and the dreamer, which are just different ways of 
discussing a Self-ignorant person, are fractured into many sub-identities, 
upadhis within an upadhi, so that most of us are dealing with a confusing 
array of selves, none of which are real.  Remember, ‘real’ in metaphysics 
means enduring, unchanging, unlimited.  Because something is experienced 
does not make it real, the snake in the rope, the blue sky, and the rising sun, 
for example.   
 With reference to my son, I’m a father.  With reference to my father, a 
son.  With reference to my wife, I’m a husband.  To my boss I’m an 
employee.  I’m a devotee with reference to God and a taxpayer with 
reference to the government.  With reference to myself I’m a success, 
failure, victim, victimizer, sports fan, audiophile or any of the thousands of 
ready-made identities available today.  The many often conflicting roles we 
play as waking and dream state egos are limited by each other, other selves 
playing similar or different roles, and our ideas about the meaning of these 
selves.  Caught in this thicket of identities, is it any wonder I suffer?  In the 
end, spiritual life, no matter what the path, always boils down finding out 
who one is minus all one’s roles and experiences.  
 Not that there’s anything “wrong” with role playing.  Society only 
functions efficiently when our roles are well-defined and we play them 
impeccably.  But when we identify ourselves completely with our roles we 
suffer.  Spiritually, identification with the role, not the role itself, is the 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 12 
problem.  For example, though an actress identifies herself  with the 
character, she seamlessly returns to her original identity when the curtain 
falls.  Even though the audience completely believes her illusion, she 
remembers her real self throughout.  
 After patient analysis I can see I’m not any of these personalities.  
What am I then?  The limitless I.  And what is the limitless I?  The limitless 
I is called the substrate27  in Vedanta.  A substrate makes the error that I’m 
limited possible.  The rope in our example, is a substrate, something whose 
nature is so subtle it is possible to mistake it for something else.  The fact 
that I’m formless Consciousness makes the playing of myriad roles possible.   
 A substrate is also the essence, a form reduced to its ultimate nature.  
For example, a ring, a bracelet, and a necklace are three forms into which 
gold can be crafted.  If the three are melted down, their forms are destroyed 
but nothing substantial is lost because the gold, their essence, remains.  
Meditation on the nature of ourselves melts down the waker, dreamer, and 
sleeper destroying the relative I’s and leaving the limitless I shining as the 
innermost Self of the seeker.   
 When I look more carefully into this conscious being I find that I’m 
whole and complete.  Nothing is missing.  Because nothing is missing I’m 
peaceful and desireless.  If I’m peaceful and desireless I never change.  
When I look into my limitlessness I discover that I’m free of everything.  
Being free of limitation means that I’m eternally blissful, as I am in sleep.  
When I look into my bliss I see that my nature is pure love. 
 If my real Self is like this, what need is there to assume limited 
identities?  Or, better yet, knowing who I am, I won’t get caught up in the 
limited identities life asks me to play.  Self-Realization, enlightenment, 
liberation, salvation is not a mind-blowing mystical state but simply the 
condition of someone abiding in his or her real nature.  To suppose that one 
must enter a transcendental superconscious state to lose the waker, dreamer, 
sleeper identities is untrue.  The enlightened sleep, dream, and carry on a 
normal waking life - minus the feeling of limitation bedeviling the 
unenlightened.  Free of the expectation that experience should bring lasting 
happiness, they never deny duality, only its apparent reality, because, like 
the snake in the rope, it isn’t actually there.  
 
VEDANTA AND MEDITATION 
 
 Even a careful reading of the Mandukya or a few teachings at the feet 
of a scriptural master would probably not produce the firm and lasting 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 13 
knowledge of oneself as the limitless I.   So in the eighth century a great 
sage, Gaudapada, added a meditation to the verses to help the seeker realize 
the Self.   In this meditation the three states are symbolized by three sounds 
and the “forth state,” 28  the limitless I, is referred to as soundless.  Meditation 
on the three states confers certain benefits, but meditation on the Silence 
with right understanding 29  produces liberation.  
 Silence is twofold.  Relative silence, a negative state, is merely the 
absence of sound and not the Self.  Because sound is so distracting, spiritual 
literature often prescribes cultivating relative silence.  But the Upanishad’s 
definition of sound includes mental and emotional noise.  Often, only in 
relative silence do we realize how disturbed our consciousness is.  The 
absence of thought is also relative silence.  This is why a blank mind is not 
enlightenment.   
 The second kind of silence is “absolute.”  Absolute means not 
opposed to sound.  Absolute Silence is best realized in relative silence and 
could profitably be described as the Silence/Awareness because of which 
both sound and relative science are known.  The absolute Silence is the Self, 
the Limitless I.  
 So how to get to absolute Silence?  
 
A SIMPLE TECHNIQUE 
 
  The following simple technique, as old as the hills, introduces the 
meditator, the seeker, to the limitless I, the sought.  
 
THE BODY 
 
 
Our relationship with the body reflects in how we sit.  If holding the 
body up is difficult for physical reasons, lying down is acceptable if the 
tendency to sleep can be overcome as the mind empties.  Some go for the 
full lotus, the less physical the half-lotus or the simple meditative poses 
evolved by Hatha Yoga.  In India where yoga evolved people have no 
furniture so sitting cross-legged on the ground is second nature.  If you’re 
forever having to smile benignly through the pain in your feet because 
they’re resting on top of the thighs, it’s best to opt for an easy chair.  Except 
for the attempt to awaken dormant energies in the body, a practice not 
recommended for neophytes, the position of the body isn’t critical.  It should 
be comfortable and the meditator prepared to take a short vacation from it.  
 
 ATTITUDE 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 14 
 
 On the mental level the pose should be kingly or queenly: gracious, 
upright, poised, noble, and generous.  A careful, sensitive, inquiring state of 
mind, like a botanist patiently examining a delicate flower, is suggested.  
The meditator should think of meditation as an afternoon on the beach, not a 
shift in the mines.   
 When the eyes are closed and you’ve settled in, what’s next?  Ask for 
help.  Obviously, if you knew who you were you wouldn’t be meditating in 
the first place, so by sitting down you are really saying you don’t know 
anything, the most essential ingredient.  Most who get as far as the idea of 
meditation believe in a higher power, a God, a spirit guide, a guru figure, the 
saints, the universe, “guidance,” a deity - whatever.  Irrespective of the 
invocation’s form, the limitless I,  will respond.  The Self put the meditation 
idea in the mind in the first place so everything that needs to happen will 
happen. 
 Make a resolution to leave your worries and involvements behind.  
It’s good to meditate in a place that isn’t used for other activities.  Feel 
satisfied you are making an effort to meditate.  Third, clear the mind of 
memories of previous meditations, good or bad.  Trying to improve on a bad 
meditation or reproduce a good one is futile and only agitates the mind.   
 
 BODY SCAN 
 
 
After the invocation the first part of the meditation involves scanning 
and relaxing the body from the feet up.  If you have a hard time relaxing 
your feet use a little visualization.  Imagine you are in your feet as a ball of 
warm peaceful light-filled Consciousness, and expand your presence until 
the feet are hollow.  Then bore your way up the legs relaxing all the muscles, 
releasing tension in the ankles, knees, and hips.  Take your time.  It may 
seem a cheap trick but isn’t as farfetched as it seems because the body is a 
vast field of consciousness, not a constipated little ball of matter.  If the “ball 
of light” doesn’t work physically relax your way up the legs.  Spend a bit of 
time working on the abdominal and stomach regions to neutralize the lower 
part of the trunk.  Because they are associated with the power and fear 
chakra and waste removal these organs often carry negative energy.  Move 
up and explore the chest.  Its connection with the emotional center causes 
angry and unforgiving feelings to lodge there, so the muscles are often tight.  
Leisurely scan this area leaving it light-filled and relaxed; then work up to 
the neck and shoulders.  Much mental tension accumulates here so take your 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 15 
time.  When its relaxed move out to the tips of the fingers and hollow out the 
arms like you did the legs.  Then redo the neck and shoulders. 
 The face we carry around in the world usually isn’t our real face so we 
need to do something to get it back to normal.  Work around the chin, 
mouth, and cheeks first, then up to the eyes and forehead.  You’ll find lots of 
vibrations hovering around these regions so release the muscles supporting 
them and let them dissolve.  When you’ve finished the face should be 
expressionless.  A smile or frown means too much energy’s been left behind.  
Aim for the indifferent look of a Buddha, or the peaceful face of the dead. 
 The idea behind all this scanning and relaxing is to prepare the body 
for your exit.  Thinking of the body as an automobile and yourself as the 
driver may be helpful.  The driver has returned from a long day on the road, 
is going to park the car in the garage, and enter his or her warm comfortable 
home for the evening.  Before you park it for good, check the whole thing to 
see that it’s comfortable in its seat and turn your attention to the breath. 
 
  THE BREATH 
 
 The breath, as you have probably noticed, goes in and out nicely on its 
own.  The idea in the first part of this meditation is to watch the breath, not 
breathe consciously, although you may notice that observing the breath 
consciousizes it a bit.  Not to worry.  It will soon settle down and return to 
its normal pattern.  Although a sophisticated yogic science of breath control 
has evolved, working with the breath is not profound.  As far as meditation 
is concerned we don’t want to control anything.  Control means ego and a lot 
of work.  And the point of meditation is to relax, not just physically but 
mentally.  Watching the breath gives the mind something to do, keeps it out 
of trouble. 
 As mentioned above, the mind always wants a bit of change, a little 
glamour or excitement and doesn’t appreciate hard work.   Before long the 
meditator will find watching the breath boring.  But boring’s good.  
Learning to enjoy boredom is one of the benefits of meditation. 
  At this point I give the mind a challenge by training my attention to 
ride on the breath as it goes in and out.  When the breath is out the attention 
is out and when the breath comes flowing in, the attention comes with it, as 
if riding on an upside-down swing. 
 Of course the mind will have its little trips, so you might discover it 
trekking in the Andes or eating chateaubriand at the Twenty One club 
between the inbreath and the outbreath.  The meditator should pull it back, 
try to synchronize it with the breath.  You don’t have to be one hundred 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 16 
percent, get the mind to ride perfectly on every breath.  Don’t bother to get 
upset if it doesn’t work immediately.  Take your time.  It will come.  
Anyone can do it. 
 Meditation’s not about the breath anyway.  The breath is just a tool.  
How long should one work with the breath?  There’s no hard and fast rule, 
sometimes five or ten minutes, sometimes longer.  What you’re looking for 
is a sign that the mind is getting quiet because it settles down quickly when 
synchronized with the breath. 
 If you see that the mind and breath are synchronizing, use surplus 
attention to release pent-up thoughts and feelings on the outbreath.  Don’t 
relate to or analyze the thoughts at this point, simply pay attention to what 
you’re doing, and let the mind empty on its own.  Just as the outbreath 
cleanses the body, releasing thoughts detoxifies the mind.  From a 
meditative perspective the meditator’s relationship to the thoughts is more 
important than the thoughts themselves.  Later when you’re seeing from the 
Self it may be helpful to analyze them, even though ultimately all thoughts 
are useless.30   At this point don’t worry about losing them, they’ll be back.  
The mind will never completely empty, so don’t worry.  The point is to take 
a little pressure off, help it quiet down. 
 
 THE SILENCE 
 
 The mind is becoming quiet when you start to be conscious of all sorts 
of sounds you weren’t previously aware of.  You never hear the clock 
ticking because the mind, formerly occupied with its thoughts, is emptying.  
You may hear the heart beat, the scratching of the breath as it goes in and 
out, snippets of conversation taking place blocks away, the hum of the 
kitchen refrigerator, a fly buzzing lazily in the adjoining room.  The thoughts 
may be amplified, larger than life, or slower, as if they were slogging 
through molasses.  You might start picking up on them as they start rather 
than at the end of their cycle. 
 You will notice these things because you are now surrounded by a 
bubble of Silence which, depending on the quietude of the mind, may be 
hardly noticeable or roar as it does out on the great plains in the dead of a 
summer night. 
 When the Silence appears as a tangible presence, take your attention 
from the breath and fix it on the Silence.  Because it’s served its purpose, the 
breath should drop out of consciousness, or seem very light, faint, far away, 
irrelevant.  Sometimes the mind gets completely swallowed by the silence 
and you find yourself deep within your Self, unaware of the breath, the 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 17 
noises in the room, your thoughts, absolutely everything - a state similar to 
conscious sleep.  Time dissolves and you are overcome with an ecstatic 
peacefulness, difficult to describe. 
 Many unusual experiences can happen when the mind is quiet.  Let 
them happen, don’t cling.  All experience, like thought, is essentially 
transitory, not subject to ego control.  And the purpose of meditation is not 
to produce specific pleasurable experiences but to inquire into the nature of 
the Self and the mind. 
 Unless you’re aiming for nirvikalpa samadhi, the state without 
thought, which will not give Self knowledge,31 see that you remain alert and 
allow the senses and mind to function.  The presence of thought does not 
affect the Silence.  The ideal situation is to observe the thoughts and sounds 
appear into and disappear out of the Silence like phantoms.  The silent 
peaceful Awareness in which they appear is experienced as a rocklike, real, 
luminous and eternal presence.  The experience of the Silence is the essence 
of meditation because it lets the meditator observe first hand the 
insubstantiality and unreality of the body/mind instrument, in a way reading 
books and listening to lectures can never do. 
 If the ego insists on intruding, making itself uncomfortable in the 
Silence, trying to distract like a needy child, you can teach it to surrender, 
allow the thoughts and feelings to arise and fall without interference.  I think 
of the Silence as the altar of the inner temple and take great pleasure 
witnessing the thoughts and feelings arise out of and disappear back into It.  
The discipline of meditation involves a struggle with the ego to keep 
attention fixed on the Silence.  If the Silence is particularly deep or radiant 
the ego will be so stunned it will surrender completely, like an awestruck kid 
at a carnival.  But this is not always the case, not because the Silence is 
unattractive but because powerful samskaras carry the attention far afield. 
 One wouldn’t think to visualize or chant anything at this time because 
the experience of the Silence itself is fascinating and fulfilling.  However, 
sometimes the mantra arises spontaneously, chanting itself.  Occasionally, 
when a particularly subtle part of the Unconscious is active, wonderful inner 
visions manifest. 
 The meditation is not creating the Silence, although it may seem so.  
The Silence is the substratum of all experience, the self-luminous 
Consciousness that is the source of every perception - the limitless I.  The 
meditation technique simply withdraws enough consciousness from the body 
and mind to allow the ever-present and apparently-hidden Silence to 
manifest. 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 18 
 Once the meditator is proficient in contacting the Silence the question 
of what the Silence is and what sort of relationship one wants will arise.  
Although there are no rules, I like to encourage the meditator to explore the 
boundaries between his or her waking/dreaming self and the Silence.  
 The Silence is the most tangible manifestation of the Self, the 
realization of which frees one from suffering.  There are many ways to relate 
to the Self but I like to see it as an intimate friendly lover, in whose presence 
I feel terribly comfortable.  Try surrendering, melting into Its compassionate 
embrace, allowing the watcher, the concentrator, the meditator, to dissolve 
into it.  When the ego opens up to the Silence its cleansing waters flood in, 
healing body and mind. 
 The Silence may not seem so much like silence as Peace, a sense of 
being completely at rest, fulfilled, and unconcerned, the “peace that passeth 
understanding.” 
 Or as inexplicable bubbling blissfullness. 
 Or limitlessness, emptiness, and fullness. 
 Contact of the mind with the Self can be described in many ways, all 
equally valid, but experience of the Self through the mind is not Self-
Knowledge, Enlightenment. 
 Enlightenment is the re-discovery of oneself as the Self. 
 The question of what illumines the blissful, silent, peaceful Presence 
needs to be answered.  How is this Self, which is routinely ignored in the 
waking, dream, and deep sleep states suddenly available for experience?  It 
can’t be known through the senses, or through the mind in its normal 
thought and emotion-dominated state, so how is it known?  Is there someone 
other than It illumining It or is It illumining Itself?  What is the nature of the 
Self and how does it relate to the “me” I think I am? 
 Meditation, all the little tricks, working with the breath and mind,  
simply creates an inner environment conducive to the exploration of the 
Self.  As mentioned, most seekers have an exaggerated and fantastic notion 
of enlightenment.  Because their views are so unrealistic they’re not going to 
get it even when it’s staring them straight in the face. 
 The best source of knowledge on the nature of the Self is scripture, 
particularly very old texts, the Mandukya and other Upanishads, for 
example.  These sources, representing purified, factual, collective 
knowledge can be trusted because no specific ego is responsible for them.  
For example, the following verses from an Eighth Century text, Atma Bodh, 
by Shankaracharya, a reformulation of Upanishadic ideas written in the first 
person, presents the Self as pure knowledge. 
 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 19 
 
“By negating conditionings 32  with the 
knowledge “I am not this” 
realize your identity as the Self 
as indicated in scripture. 
 
The three bodies33  are perceived objects     
and as perishable as  bubbles. 
Realize through pure discrimination 
I am not them. 
 
I am infinite non-dual pure Consciousness. 
 
Because I am other than the body 
I don’t suffer its changes. 
I am not born nor do I die. 
I have no sense organs 
so I am uninvolved in the world. 
 
Because I am other than the mind, 
I am free from sorrow, attachment, malice and fear. 
Scripture says I am pure, without thought and desire 
and so I am. 
 
I have no attributes. 
I live without breathing. 
 I am eternal, formless and ever-free. 
 I am the same in all, 
 filling all things with being. 
 I am  infinite non-dual pure Consciousness.”  
                      
 The seventh of the Mandukya’s twelve mantras describes the Self like 
this:  “It is neither conscious of the external or internal worlds (because 
from its standpoint there are no worlds), nor is it a mass of consciousness 
(because it is uniform throughout, like space).”  This description is designed 
to negate the waker, dreamer, and sleeper.   
 The text continues: “It is not simple  (as opposed to complex, made of 
parts) consciousness.  Nor is it unconscious (inert, insentient).  It cannot be 
seen by the senses, is incomprehensible to the mind, uninferable, 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 20 
unthinkable, and indescribable.34   Its nature is pure consciousness, negating 
all phenomena, non-dual, blissful, and peaceful.”  
 
EXPERIENCE VERSUS KNOWLEDGE 
 
 While we can’t avoid it, using the language of experience to describe 
the Self or enlightenment can be potentially misleading.  People customarily 
talk from the point of view of a subject looking out at an object.  The 
objects, one’s experiences, are invariably the points of interest to them and 
others, not the subject, the one reporting them.  If someone says they saw a 
blazing light without limit, the ‘blazing limitless light’ captures one’s 
attention and will be assumed to be the content of the experience.  However, 
the Consciousness, referred to as “knowledge” in Vedantic literature, 
witnessing the light is the essential ingredient and the light nonessential 
because without Consciousness nothing is experienced.  Were the light the 
Self, it would be conscious that it was being witnessed, but subtle objects of 
experience, like dreams and visions, are never conscious.   
 Seeing a light or lights is a common experience which should 
stimulate inquiry.  What ‘light’ is illumining the light?  Who saw the light?  
That ‘who’ is you, the Self, whose existence is in no way validated by a 
particular experience.  In fact, without knowledge of what we’re seeking the 
meditator can easily become addicted, living from experience to experience, 
craving more and more, building a grotesque spiritual ego. 
 Aside from an irrefutable proof that one is not who one thinks one is, 
which should pique curiosity about one’s real nature, the Mandukya’s three-
state analysis might be profitably employed in meditation to discriminate the 
three egos and their states from the Self.   After the detailed analysis of the 
three states, Gaudapada says that waking and dream are really dream states, 
because both the waker and the dreamer, who are merely egos experiencing 
thoughts and feelings as their primary realities, are Self ignorant, the only 
difference being that the physical body is active in the waking and not in the 
dream.   
 Still, thought and feeling is Consciousness in form, just like waves are 
the ocean.  By tracing the thoughts to their source, the waker/dreamer entity, 
the thinker/feeler can be separated35  from the Illuminator and negated.  
Occasionally in meditation, the mind empties sufficiently and the 
waker/dreamer becomes a sleeper.  Extreme vigilance is required to allow 
the waker/dreamer to become the sleeper without losing contact with the 
basis of the discrimination, the limitless I.  However, the experience of 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 21 
watching the sleeper allows the meditator to understand the sleeper as an 
object, not-self.          
 The following is an English translation of the Mandukya Upanishad. 
 
(1)  Om, the Word, is all this,36  a clear explanation of which follows: all that 
is past, present, and future is Om.  Whatever is before the past and after the 
future is Om.  
 
2)  All this is the Limitless I.37   This Self38  is the limitless I. 
 
(3)  The first quarter (of the Self) is the waker whose field is the waking 
state, who is conscious of the external world of objects, who has seven limbs 
and nineteen mouths, and who enjoys the world’s gross objects.  
 
(4)  The second quarter is the dreamer whose field of experience is the 
dream state, who is conscious of the internal world of objects, who has 
seven limbs and nineteen mouths and who enjoys the subtle objects of the 
dream world.   
 
(5)  The third quarter is the sleeper in whom all experiences become 
undifferentiated into a mass of consciousness, and who is the gateway to the 
waking and dream states.  In the deep sleep state the sleeper neither sees or 
desires subtle or gross objects.     
 
(6)  The sleeper is the Lord of all manifest existence.  It is the knower of all, 
the inner controller, and the source of all.  The sleep state is that from which 
all things originate and into which they all dissolve.   
 
(7)  The Self is known as “the forth” and is to be realized.  It is neither 
conscious of the external or internal worlds, nor is it a mass of 
consciousness.  It is not simple consciousness, nor is it unconscious.  It 
cannot be seen by the senses, is unrelated to anything, incomprehensible to 
the mind, uninferable, unthinkable, and  indescribable.  It’s nature is pure 
consciousness, the negation of all phenomena, non-dual, blissful, and 
peaceful. 
 
(8)  Viewed as sounds the Self is A, U, M. 
 
(9)  The one who meditates on the waking state as “A,” the first and most 
pervasive,  fulfills all desires and becomes a leader.  
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 22 
 
(10)  The one who meditates on the dream state as “U” because it is 
between and superior, attains superior knowledge and is treated fairly by 
all.  In his line of descendants everyone attains Self knowledge. 
 
(11)  The one who meditates on the sleep state as “M” as the measure and 
that wherein all things become one is able to realize the nature of things and 
beings and understand all things within himself.  
 
(12)  That which is partless, soundless, incomprehensible, beyond the 
senses, blissful, non-dual and that wherein all phenomena are resolved is 
the “forth,” the Self.  The one who knows It dissolves the self in It.  
 
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
 23 
 
FOOTNOTES 
 
 1 Veda means knowledge in Sanskrit. 
 2 “Absolute” in the sense that desire underlying one’s need to know the 
meaning of life is laid to rest once and for all. 
 3 Shravanam in Sanskrit. 
 4 Mananam 
 5 Nididyasana.   
 6 Freedom from limitation. 
 7 A special “spiritual” state of mind 
 8 “World” is a psychological term, meaning “field of experience.”  In the 
context of this Upanishad the three worlds are the realm of the senses, the 
world of dreams, and world of sleep.  
 9 Projection, in psychological language.  
 10 The three selves, their instruments, and fields will be presently explained. 
 11 Om is a sound symbol of the limitless I.  In a scientific sense the verse 
means that the whole world is made of Consciousness in a state of vibration.   
 12 The word “Consciousness” as defined in Vedic texts is consciousness 
devoid of modification, thought and feeling.  In the West the term refers to 
the modifications taking place in consciousness.  I have capitalized it to 
make the distinction clear.   
 13 In fact the text says nineteen mouths because it includes the “five pranas,” 
the physiological systems and “ chitta”, memory. 
 14 Air, fire, water, earth, and space.  These elements are called the Virat, the 
macrocosmic gross body. 
 15 Consciousness can’t in fact turn inward or outward because it is all-
pervasive, like space.  The consciousness referred to is the mind.  
 16 The impressions of past experience, also termed “ samskaras” in spiritual 
literature. 
 17 See Chapter 2 Meditation, The Science of the Self, by the author.  
 18 The substance of the dream field, thought and feeling, are drawn from the 
macrocosmic mind, Hiranyagargha. 
 19 The impressions of the experience of all beings over limitless time.  
Creation, according to Vedanta, is simply the recycling of unmanifest 
experience. 
 20 The personal subconscious, impressions of a particular individual. 
 21 The limitless I  never becomes a limited experiencer in fact, but seems to 
be an experiencer when associated with a particular upahdhi.  
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
2 4 
22 One of the most common Sanskrit terms for limitlessness is “ ananda, 
which literally means “without an end”  and is generally rendered in English 
as “bliss.”  The sleep state is a blissful experience because consciousness is 
not broken up into thoughts, feelings, and perceptions as it is in the waking 
and dream states.  
23 Although from It’s standpoint there are no states to illumine, the 
apparently real states are only known because they are illumined by the Self. 
24 An example of a meditation to contact the Self is given later.  
25 The Patanjali Yoga Sutras 
27 Aadisthanam 
28 Nowhere does the Upanishad refer to a “forth” state of consciousness.  The 
Self, to set it off from the waker, dreamer, and sleeper is referred to as 
“ turiya,”  the forth.   
29 That I am the Silence, limitless Awareness.  
30 Useless with reference to contacting the Self.   
31 Self knowledge takes place in the mind, but if the mind is non-existent 
how can it take place? 
32 The three egos and their states. 
33 Refers to the gross, subtle, and causal bodies which correspond to the 
waking, dream, and deep sleep state.  
34 All descriptions are not to be thought of as capturing the Self in words.  
The words might be profitably thought of as tracks leading toward the Self, 
down which the mind may travel.  Or signs pointing in It’s direction.    
35 The separation is not physical, but a discrimination of the mind. 
36 All existence. 
37 Om is the Limitless I 
38 Atman, the Limitless I associated with the individual “soul.”. 
39 Though all-pervasive, the Self, for the purposes of meditation, is assigned 
these three locations. 
40 The Self.
Find more free PDF E-book at www.holybooks.com 
http://www.holybooks.com/mandukya-upanishad-an-ancient-sanskrit-text-on-the-nature-of-reality/
