ABOUT THE BOOK
The renowned Indian sage Ramana Maharshi is beloved
by Buddhists, Hindus, Christians, and Taoists alike for
the inspirational power of his teachings, which transcend
all religious differences. 
Here is a collection of Sri
Ramana’s instructions and discourses culled from three
works: 
Who Am I?
, 
Spiritual Instructions
, and 
Maharshi’s
Gospel.
 These teachings are arranged by topics such as
work and renunciation, silence and solitude, peace and
happiness, and the discipline of self-inquiry. 
Reading this
book, presented in question-and-answer format, evokes
the feeling of being with this outstanding teacher at one
of his intimate teaching sessions.
RAMANA MAHARSHI (1879–1950) was one of the
greatest spiritual teachers of modern-day India. At the
age of seventeen he attained a profound experience of
the true Self. After some years of silent seclusion he
finally began to reply to the questions put to him by
spiritual seekers all over the world. Though he wrote
little, his many conversations and verbal teachings were
recorded by followers.
 
 
Sign up to receive news and special offers from
Shambhala Publications.
Or visit us online to sign up at
shambhala.com/eshambhala
.
B
HAGAVAN
 Ś
RĪ
 R
AMANA
 M
AHARSHI
The Spiritual Teaching of
R
AMANA
 M
AHARSHI
FOREWORD BY C. G. JUNG
SHAMBHALA
Boston & London
2015
Shambhala Publications, Inc.
Horticultural Hall
300 Massachusetts Avenue
Boston, Massachusetts 02115
www.shambhala.com
Cover design by Jim Zaccaria
© 1972 Sri Ramanasramam
Biographical Sketch and Glossary © 1998 by Shambhala Publications, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any
means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
publisher.
The Library of Congress Catalogues the previous edition of this book as follows:
Ramana, Maharshi.
The spiritual teaching of Ramana Maharshi.
1. Spiritual life (Hinduism) I. Title.
[BL1237.36.R35   1988]     294.5’448     88-18220
eISBN 978-0-8348-2537-6
ISBN 978-0-87773-024-8 (pbk.)
ISBN 978-1-59030-139-5 (Shambhala Classics)
Contents
PUBLISHER’S NOTE
PREFACE
FOREWORD BY C. G. JUNG
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
WHO AM I?
SPIRITUAL INSTRUCTION
Instruction
Practice
Experience
Attainment
MAHARSHI’S GOSPEL
Work and Renunciation
Silence and Solitude
Mind Control
Bhakti and Jñāna
Self and Individuality
Self-Realization
Guru and His Grace
Peace and Happiness
Self-Inquiry
Sādhana and Grace
The Jñāni and the World
The Heart Is the Self
Aham and Aham-vṛtti
NOTES
GLOSSARY
E-MAIL SIGN-UP
Publisher’s Note
This book contains diacritics and special characters. If you
encounter difficulty displaying these characters, please set
your e-reader device to publisher defaults (if available) or to
an alternate font.
Preface
A gently indrawn breath—with no thought—can bring the
ecstasy of total awareness—beyond words.
In these three books of answers to inquirers, Bhagavan
Ramana Maharshi, without offending common sense, reason
or logic, has come as close as possible to saying the
unsayable and points the way—innumerable ways—for You
to find the Self and Be.
To Understand the Ultimate—experience must be Intimate.
Beyond that which you think is that which you are.
Realizing this does not involve specific practices or attitudes
other than Understanding. No withdrawal is necessary—no
change of present time, place or condition—only a change of
viewpoint, which you bring about yourself for your Self.
A recent letter from S. S. Cohen says: “‘Be’ sums up the
whole practical teaching of Bhagavan. There is nothing in
the material life to compensate for it—neither wealth, sex,
art, science nor any other ideal. It is the Greatest Good—the
bliss and truth absolute.”
Bhagavan found Enlightenment for himself without a
physical guru.
In these books of questions, asked and answered, may you
find your answer. This can be a trip to end all trips. Find out
who you are and you can’t help but Be! Know that you
immortal Are and you have but to Be.
May all beings be well, may all beings be happy.
Peace, peace.
PEACE
Joe & Guinevere Miller
Foreword
Ś
Rī
 R
AMANA AND
 H
IS
 M
ESSAGE TO
 M
ODERN
 M
AN
Śrī Ramana is a true son of the Indian earth. He is genuine
and, in addition to that, something quite phenomenal. In
India he is the whitest spot in a white space.
What we find in the life and teachings of Śrī Ramana is the
purest of India; with its breath of world-liberated and
liberating humanity, it is a chant of millenniums. This melody
is built up on a single, great motif, which, in a thousand
colorful reflexes, rejuvenates itself within the Indian spirit,
and the latest incarnation of which is Śrī Ramana Maharshi
himself.
The identification of the Self with God will strike the
European as shocking. It is a specifically Oriental realization,
as expressed in Śrī Ramana’s utterances. Psychology cannot
contribute anything further to it, except the remark that it
lies far beyond its scope to propose such a thing. However, it
is clear to the Indian that the Self as spiritual Source is not
different from God; and in so far as man abides in his Self,
he is not only contained in God but is God Himself. Śrī
Ramana is quite clear in this respect.
The Goal of Eastern practices is the same as that of
Western mysticism: the focus is shifted from the “I” to the
Self, from man to God. This means that the “I” disappears in
the Self, and the man in God. A similar effort is described in
the 
exercitia spiritualia
, in which the “personal property,”
the “I” subjugate to the highest possible degree to the
possessorship of Christ. Śrī Ramakrishna adopted the same
position in regard 
to the Self, only with him the dilemma
between the “I” and the Self comes a little more closely to
the foreground. Śrī Ramana declares unmistakably that the
real purpose of spiritual practice is the dissolution of the “I.”
Ramakrishna, however, shows a somewhat hesitating
attitude in this respect. Though he says, “As long as the I-
sense lasts, so long are true Knowledge (
jñāna
) and
Liberation (
mukti
) impossible,” yet he must acknowledge the
fatal nature of 
ahaṃkāra
. He says, “How very few can obtain
this Union (
samādhi
) and free themselves from this ‘I’? It is
very rarely possible. Talk as much as you want, isolate
yourself continuously, still this ‘I’ will always return to you.
Cut down the poplar tree today, and you will find tomorrow
it forms new shoots. When you ultimately find that this ‘I’
cannot be destroyed, let it remain as ‘I’ the servant.” In
relation to this concession, Śrī Ramana is certainly the more
radical.
The changing relations between these two quantities, the
“I” and the Self, represent a field of experience which the
introspective consciousness of the East has explored to a
degree almost unattainable by the Western human being.
The philosophy of the East, which is so very different from
ours, represents to us a highly valuable present, which,
however, we “must obtain in order to possess.” Śrī Ramana’s
words once again sum up the principal things which the
Spirit of India has accumulated during thousands of years in
contemplation of the Inner Self; and the individual life and
work of the Maharshi exemplifies once more the innermost
striving of the Indian people to find the liberating original
Source.
The Eastern nations are threatened by a quick
disintegration of their spiritual goods, and what comes into
their place cannot always be considered to belong to the
best of the Western mind. Therefore, one may look upon
sages like Śrī Ramakrishna and Śrī Ramana as modern
prophets. They not only remind us of the thousands-of-years-
old spiritual culture of India, but also directly embody it.
Their life and teachings form an impressive warning not to
forget the demand of the soul in all the new things of
Western civilization 
and their materialistic-technical and
commercial concerns of the world. The breathless impulse to
obtain and possess in the political, social and intellectual
fields, which is rummaging the apparent, unappeasable
passion in the soul of the Westerner, is also spreading
continuously in the East and threatens to bear consequences
not yet to be overlooked. Not only in India but also in China,
much has already been lost in which once the life of the soul
lived and flourished. The externalization-culture of the West
can truly clear away many evils, the destruction of which
seems to be very desirable and advantageous. But, as
experience has shown, this progress is bought too dearly
with a loss of spiritual culture. It is undoubtedly more
comfortable to dwell in a well-ordered and hygienically
furnished house, but that does not answer the question as to
who
 is the dweller in this house, and whether his soul enjoys
a similar state of order and purity, that is, like that of the
house serving for external life. Once man is set to the pursuit
of external things, he is never satisfied, as experience shows,
with the mere necessities of life, but always strives after
more and more, which, true to his prejudices, he always
seeks in external things. He forgets entirely that in spite of
all external success inwardly he remains the same, and
therefore complains of his poverty when he owns only one
motor car instead of two like others around him. Certainly,
the external life of man can bear many improvements and
beautifications, but they lose their significance to the extent
to which the inner man cannot keep up with them. The
provision with all “necessities” is, without doubt, a source of
happiness which is not to be underestimated. But above and
beyond it, the inner man raises his claim, which cannot be
satisfied by any external goods: and the less this voice is
heard in the hunt for “the wonderful things” of this world,
the more the inner man becomes a source of inexplicable
bad luck and ununderstandable unhappiness in the midst of
conditions of life from which one would expect something
quite different. The externalization leads to an incurable
suffering, because nobody 
can understand how one could
suffer because of one’s own nature. Nobody is surprised at
his own insatiability, but looks upon it as his birthright; he
does not realize that the one-sidedness of the diet of his soul
ultimately leads to the most serious disturbances of balance.
It is this which forms the illness of the Westerner, and he
does not rest till he has infected the whole world with his
greedy restlessness.
The wisdom and mysticism of the East have, therefore, a
very great deal to tell us, provided they speak in their own
inimitable speech. They should remind us of what we
possess in our own culture of similar things and have already
forgotten, and direct our attention to that which we put
aside as unimportant, namely the destiny of our inner man.
The life and teachings of Śrī Ramana are important not only
for the Indian but also for the Westerner. Not only do they
form a record of great human interest, but also a warning
message to a humanity which threatens to lose itself in the
chaos of its unconsciousness and lack of self-control.
C. G. Jung
The Foreword by C. G. Jung was originally published as the Foreword to Heinrich
Zimmer’s 
Der Weg zum Selbst
 and was translated by R. F. C. Hull in volume 11
of the 
Collected Works
 of C. G. Jung. Used by permission of Princeton University
Press, publishers of the Bollingen Series.
Biographical Sketch
Ramana Maharshi (1879–1950) was one of the greatest
spiritual teachers of modern-day India. At the age of
seventeen he attained a profound experience of the true Self
without the guidance of a Guru and thereafter remained
conscious of his identity with the Absolute (
Brahman
) at all
times. After some years of silent seclusion he finally began to
reply to the questions put to him by spiritual seekers all over
the world. He followed no particular traditional system of
teaching, but rather spoke directly from his own experience
of nonduality. Ramana Maharshi wrote virtually nothing; his
teaching took the form of conversations with visitors seeking
his guidance (as transcribed by followers), the brief
instructions he left with his followers, and a few songs. His
method of instruction was to direct the questioner again and
again to his true self and to recommend, as a path to
realization, a tireless form of self-inquiry featuring the
question “Who am I?” The transcribed conversations of
Ramana Maharshi are known among spiritual seekers the
world over and prized for their great inspirational power,
which transcends all religious differences.
Śrī Ramana Maharshi was born on 29 December 1879 in
Tiruchuli, Tamil Nadu (South India), the son of Shundaram
Ayyar, a scribe and country lawyer; he was given the name
Venkatarāman, abbreviated as Ramana. At the age of
seventeen he suddenly had an experience of death one day
in which he realized that the body dies but the consciousness
is not touched by death. “I” am immortal consciousness. “All
these,” he later reported, “were no idle speculations. They
went through me like a powerful, living truth that I
experienced directly, almost without thinking. ‘I’ [i.e., the
true I or Self] was reality, the only reality in this momentary
state. All 
conscious activity that was related to my body
flowed into this ‘I.’ From that moment, all attention was
drawn as if by powerful magic to the ‘I’ or the ‘Self.’ The fear
of death was permanently extinguished. From this time on I
remained fully absorbed in the ‘Self.’”
After this experience Venkatarāman lost all interest in
things of the world and ultimately left home without his
parents’ permission, to find his way to the holy mountain of
Arunāchala. There he spent several years in silent Self-
absorption, first in a dark corner of a temple in
Tiruvannāmalai, at the foot of the mountain, and later in
various caves on the mountain itself; during this time he
totally neglected all care of the body and at one point was
virtually chewed up by insects. Even when his mother sought
him out and attempted to get him to return home, he did not
break his silence but rather acted as though he did not see
her. When his followers begged him to make some response
to his mother’s desperate pleas, he wrote the following
impersonal words on a scrap of paper: “The fate of the soul
is determined in accordance with its 
prārabdha-karma
. What
is not meant to happen will not happen, however much you
wish it. What is meant to happen will happen, no matter
what you do to prevent it. This is certain. Therefore the best
path is to remain silent.”
When Ramana Maharshi later broke his silence and began
to respond to questions about the path to the Self, an 
āśrama
grew up around him in Tiruvannāmalai. There, in 1950, ill
with cancer, Ramana Maharshi passed into 
mahāsamādhi
.
The site is still visited today by spiritual seekers of every
nationality as a place of pilgrimage where the presence of
the great saint can still be felt.
Adapted from the entry “Ramana Mahar(i)shi” by Kurt Friedrichs, in 
The
Encyclopedia of Eastern Philosophy and Religion
 (Boston: Shambhala
Publications, 1988).
WHO AM I?

Who Am I?
(N
ĀN
 Y
ĀR
?)
As all living beings desire to be happy always
, 
without
misery
, 
as in the case of everyone there is observed supreme
love for one
’
s self
, 
and as happiness alone is the cause for
love
, 
in order to gain that happiness which is one
’
s nature
and which is experienced in the state of deep sleep where
there is no mind
, 
one should know one
’
s self. For that
, 
the
path of knowledge
, 
the inquiry of the form
 “Who am I?,” 
is
the principal means
.
1.
Who am I?
The gross body, which is composed of the seven humors
(
dhātus
), I am not; the five cognitive sense organs, i.e., the
senses of hearing, touch, sight, taste, and smell, which
apprehend their respective objects, i.e., sound, touch, color,
taste, and odor, I am not; the five conative sense organs, i.e.,
the organs of speech, locomotion, grasping, excretion, and
procreation, which have as their respective functions
speaking, moving, grasping, excreting, and enjoying, I am
not; the five vital airs, 
prāṇa
, etc., which perform
respectively the five functions of in-breathing, etc., I am not;
even the mind which thinks, I am not; the nescience too,
which is endowed only with the residual impressions of
objects, and in which there are no objects and no functions, I
am not.
2.
If I am none of these
, 
then who am I?
After negating all of the above-mentioned as “not this, not
this,” that Awareness which alone remains—that I am.
3.
What is the nature of Awareness?
The nature of Awareness is existence-consciousness-bliss.
4.
When will the realization of the Self be gained?
When the world which is what-is-seen has been removed,
there will be realization of the Self, which is the seer.
5.
Will there not be realization of the Self even while the
world is there
 
(taken as real)
?
There will not be.
6.
Why?
The seer and the object seen are like the rope and the
snake. Just as the knowledge of the rope which is the
substrate will not arise unless the false knowledge of the
illusory serpent goes, so the realization of the Self which is
the substrate will not be gained unless the belief that the
world is real is removed.
7.
When will the world
, 
which is the object seen
, 
be
removed?
When the mind, which is the cause of all cognitions and of
all actions, becomes quiescent, the world will disappear.
8.
What is the nature of the mind?
What is called mind is a wondrous power residing in the
Self. It causes all thoughts to arise. Apart from thoughts,
there is no such thing as mind. Therefore, thought is the
nature of mind. Apart from thoughts, there is no
independent entity called the world. In deep sleep there are
no thoughts, and there is no world. In the states of waking
and dream, there are thoughts, and there is a world also.
Just as the spider emits the thread (of the web) out of itself
and again withdraws it into itself, likewise the mind projects
the world out of itself and again resolves it into itself. When
the mind comes out of the Self, the world appears.
Therefore, when the world appears (to be real), the Self does
not appear; and when the Self appears (shines), the world
does not appear. When one persistently inquires into the
nature of the mind, the mind will end leaving the Self (as the
residue). What is referred to as the Self is the 
Ātman
. The
mind always exists 
only in dependence on something gross;
it cannot stay alone. It is the mind that is called the subtle
body or the soul (
jīva
).
9.
What is the path of inquiry for understanding the nature
of the mind?
That which rises as “I” in this body is the mind. If one
inquires as to where in the body the thought “I” rises first,
one would discover that it rises in the heart. That is the
place of the mind’s origin. Even if one thinks constantly “I,”
“I,” one will be led to that place. Of all the thoughts that
arise in the mind, the “I” thought is the first. It is only after
the rise of this that the other thoughts arise. It is after the
appearance of the first personal pronoun that the second
and third personal pronouns appear; without the first
personal pronoun there will not be the second and third.
10.
How will the mind become quiescent?
By the inquiry “Who am I?” The thought “Who am I?” will
destroy all other thoughts, and, like the stick used for
stirring the burning pyre, it will itself in the end get
destroyed. Then there will arise Self-realization.
11.
What is the means for constantly holding on to the
thought
 
“Who am I?”?
When other thoughts arise, one should not pursue them,
but should inquire: “To whom did they arise?” It does not
matter how many thoughts arise. As each thought arises, one
should inquire with diligence, “To whom has this thought
arisen?” The answer that would emerge would be “To me.”
Thereupon, if one inquires “Who am I?,” the mind will go
back to its source, and the thought that arose will become
quiescent. With repeated practice in this manner, the mind
will develop the skill to stay in its source. When the mind
that is subtle goes out through the brain and the sense
organs, the gross names and forms appear; when it stays in
the heart, the names and forms disappear. Not letting the
mind go out but retaining it in the Heart is what is called
“inwardness” (
antar-mukha
). Letting the mind go out of the
Heart is known as “externalization” (
bahir-mukha
). Thus,
when the mind stays in the Heart, the “I” which is the source
of all thoughts will go and the Self which ever exists will
shine. Whatever one does, one should do without the egoity
“I.” If one acts in that way, all will appear as of the nature of
Shiva (God).
12.
Are there no other means for making the mind
quiescent?
Other than inquiry, there are no adequate means. If
through other means it is sought to control the mind, the
mind will appear to be controlled, but will again go forth.
Through the control of breath also, the mind will become
quiescent; but it will be quiescent only so long as the breath
remains controlled, and when the breath resumes, the mind
also will again start moving and will wander as impelled by
residual impressions. The source is the same for both mind
and breath. Thought, indeed, is the nature of the mind. The
thought “I” is the first thought of the mind; and that is
egoity. It is from that whence egoity originates that breath
also originates. Therefore, when the mind becomes
quiescent, the breath is controlled, and when the breath is
controlled the mind becomes quiescent. But in deep sleep,
although the mind becomes quiescent, the breath does not
stop. This is because of the will of God, so that the body may
be preserved and other people may not be under the
impression that it is dead. In the state of waking and in
samādhi
, when the mind becomes quiescent the breath is
controlled. Breath is the gross form of mind. Till the time of
death, the mind keeps breath in the body; and when the
body dies the mind takes the breath along with it. Therefore,
the exercise of breath control is only an aid for rendering the
mind quiescent (
manonigraha
); it will not destroy the mind
(
manonāśa
).
Like the practice of breath control, meditation on the
forms of God, repetition of mantras, restriction on food, etc.,
are but aids for rendering the mind quiescent.
Through meditation on the forms of God and through
repetition 
of mantras, the mind becomes one-pointed. The
mind will always be wandering. Just as when the chain is
given to an elephant to hold in its trunk it will go along
grasping the chain and nothing else, so also when the mind
is occupied with a name or form it will grasp that alone.
When the mind expands in the form of countless thoughts,
each thought becomes weak; but as thoughts get resolved
the mind becomes one-pointed and strong; for such a mind
Self-inquiry will become easy. Of all the restrictive rules,
that relating to the taking of sattvic food in moderate
quantities is best; by observing this rule, the sattvic quality
of mind will increase, and that will be helpful to Self-inquiry.
13.
The residual impressions
 
(thoughts)
 of objects appear
unending like the waves of an ocean. When will all of
them be removed?
As the meditation on the Self rises higher and higher, the
thoughts will get destroyed.
14.
Is it possible for the residual impressions of objects that
come from beginningless time
, 
as it were
, 
to be resolved
,
and for one to remain as the pure Self?
Without yielding to the doubt “Is it possible or not?,” one
should persistently hold on to the meditation on the Self.
Even if one be a great sinner, one should not worry and
weep “Oh! I am a sinner, how can I be saved?”; one should
completely renounce the thought “I am a sinner” and
concentrate keenly on meditation on the Self; then one
would surely succeed. There are not two minds—one good
and the other evil; the mind is only one. It is the residual
impressions that are of two kinds—auspicious and
inauspicious. When the mind is under the influence of
auspicious impressions it is called good; and when it is under
the influence of inauspicious impressions it is regarded as
evil.
The mind should not be allowed to wander toward worldly
objects and what concerns other people. However bad other
people may be, one should bear no hatred for them. Both
desire 
and hatred should be eschewed. All that one gives to
others one gives to one’s self. If this truth is understood, who
will not give to others? When one’s self arises, all arises;
when one’s self becomes quiescent, all becomes quiescent.
To the extent we behave with humility, to that extent there
will result good. If the mind is rendered quiescent, one may
live anywhere.
15.
How long should inquiry be practiced?
As long as there are impressions of objects in the mind, so
long the inquiry “Who am I?” is required. As thoughts arise
they should be destroyed then and there in the very place of
their origin, through inquiry. If one resorted to
contemplation of the Self unintermittently, until the Self was
gained, that alone would do. As long as there are enemies
within the fortress, they will continue to sally forth; if they
are destroyed as they emerge, the fortress will fall into our
hands.
16.
What is the nature of the Self?
What exists in truth is the Self alone. The world, the
individual soul, and God are appearances in it, like silver in
mother-of-pearl; these three appear at the same time and
disappear at the same time.
The Self is that where there is absolutely no “I” thought.
That is called Silence. The Self itself is the world; the Self
itself is “I”; the Self itself is God; all is Shiva, the Self.
17.
Is not everything the work of God?
Without desire, resolve, or effort, the sun rises; and in its
mere presence, the sun-stone emits fire, the lotus blooms,
water evaporates; people perform their various functions
and then rest. Just as in the presence of the magnet the
needle moves, it is by virtue of the mere presence of God
that the souls governed by the three (cosmic) functions or
the fivefold divine activity perform their actions and then
rest, in accordance 
with their respective karmas. God has no
resolve; no karma attaches itself to Him. This is like worldly
actions not affecting the sun, or like the merits and demerits
of the other four elements not affecting the all-pervading
ether.
18.
Of the devotees
, 
who is the greatest?
He who gives himself up to the Self that is God is the most
excellent devotee. Giving one’s self up to God means
remaining constantly in the Self without giving room for the
rise of any thoughts other than the thought of the Self.
Whatever burdens are thrown on God, He bears them.
Since the supreme power of God makes all things move, why
should we, without submitting ourselves to it, constantly
worry ourselves with thoughts as to what should be done
and how, and what should not be done and how not? We
know that the train carries all loads, so after getting on it
why should we carry our small luggage on our head to our
discomfort, instead of putting it down in the train and feeling
at ease?
19.
What is nonattachment?
As thoughts arise, destroying them utterly without any
residue in the very place of their origin is nonattachment.
Just as the pearl-diver ties a stone to his waist, sinks to the
bottom of the sea and there takes the pearls, so each one of
us should be endowed with nonattachment, dive within
himself and obtain the Self-Pearl.
20.
Is it not possible for God and the Guru to effect the
release of a soul?
God and the Guru will only show the way to release; they
will not by themselves take the soul to the state of release.
In truth, God and the Guru are not different. Just as the
prey which has fallen into the jaws of a tiger has no escape,
so those who have come within the ambit of the Guru’s
gracious look will be saved by the Guru and will not get lost;
yet 
each one should by his own effort pursue the path shown
by God or Guru and gain release. One can know oneself only
with one’s own eye of knowledge, and not with somebody
else’s. Does he who is Rama require the help of a mirror to
know that he is Rama?
21.
Is it necessary for one who longs for release to inquire
into the nature of the categories
 (tattvas)
?
Just as one who wants to throw away garbage has no need
to analyze it and see what it is, so one who wants to know
the Self has no need to count the number of categories or
inquire into their characteristics; what he has to do is to
reject altogether the categories that hide the Self. The world
should be considered like a dream.
22.
Is there no difference between waking and dream?
Waking is long and a dream short; other than this there is
no difference. Just as waking happenings seem real while
awake, so do those in a dream while dreaming. In dream the
mind takes on another body. In both waking and dream
states, thoughts, names, and forms occur simultaneously.
23.
Is it any use reading books for those who long for
release?
All the texts say that in order to gain release one should
render the mind quiescent; therefore their conclusive
teaching is that the mind should be rendered quiescent; once
this has been understood there is no need for endless
reading. In order to quiet the mind one has only to inquire
within oneself what one’s Self is; how could this search be
done in books? One should know one’s Self with one’s own
eye of wisdom. The Self is within the five sheaths; but books
are outside them. Since the Self has to be inquired into by
discarding the five sheaths, it is futile to search for it in
books. There will come time when one will have to forget all
that one has learned.
24.
What is happiness?
Happiness is the very nature of the Self; happiness and the
Self are not different. There is no happiness in any object of
the world. We imagine through our ignorance that we derive
happiness from objects. When the mind goes out, it
experiences misery. In truth, when its desires are fulfilled, it
returns to its own place and enjoys the happiness that is the
Self. Similarly, in the states of sleep, 
samādhi
, and fainting,
and when the object desired is obtained or the object
disliked is removed, the mind becomes inward-turned and
enjoys pure Self-happiness. Thus the mind moves without
rest, alternately going out of the Self and returning to it.
Under the tree the shade is pleasant; out in the open the
heat is scorching. A person who has been going about in the
sun feels cool when he reaches the shade. Someone who
keeps on going from the shade into the sun and then back
into the shade is a fool. A wise man stays permanently in the
shade. Similarly, the mind of the one who knows the truth
does not leave 
Brahman
. The mind of the ignorant, on the
contrary, revolves in the world, feeling miserable, and for a
little time returns to 
Brahman
 to experience happiness. In
fact, what is called the world is only thought. When the
world disappears, i.e., when there is no thought, the mind
experiences happiness; and when the world appears, it goes
through misery.
25.
What is wisdom-insight
 (jñāna-dṛṣṭi)
?
Remaining quiet is what is called wisdom-insight. To
remain quiet is to resolve the mind in the Self. Telepathy,
knowing past, present and future happenings, and
clairvoyance do not constitute wisdom-insight.
26.
What is the relation between desirelessness and
wisdom?
Desirelessness is wisdom. The two are not different; they
are the same. Desirelessness is refraining from driving the
mind toward any object. Wisdom means the appearance of
no object. In other words, not seeking what is other than the
Self is detachment or desirelessness; not leaving the Self is
wisdom.
27.
What is the difference between inquiry and meditation?
Inquiry consists in retaining the mind in the Self.
Meditation consists in thinking that one’s self is 
Brahman
,
existence-consciousness-bliss.
28.
What is release?
Inquiring into the nature of one’s self that is in bondage
and realizing one’s true nature is release.
SPIRITUAL INSTRUCTION

Instruction
(U
PADEŚA
)
1.
What are the marks of a real teacher
 (sadguru)
?
Steady abidance in the Self, looking at all with an equal
eye, unshakable courage at all times, in all places and
circumstances, etc.
2.
What are the marks of an earnest disciple
 (sadśiṣya)
?
An intense longing for the removal of sorrow and
attainment of joy, and an intense aversion for all kinds of
mundane pleasure.
3.
What are the characteristics of instruction
 (upadeśa)
?
The word 
upadeśa
 means “near the place or seat” (
upa
,
near; 
deśa
, place or seat). The Guru, who is the embodiment
of that which is indicated by the terms 
sat
, 
chit
 and 
ānanda
(existence, consciousness and bliss), prevents the disciple
who, on account of his acceptance of the forms of the objects
of the senses, has swerved from his true state and is
consequently distressed and buffeted by joys and sorrows,
from continuing so and establishes him in his own real
nature without differentiation.
Upadeśa
 also means showing a distant object quite near. It
is brought home to the disciple that 
Brahman
, which he
believes to be distant and different from himself, is near and
not different from himself.
4.
If it be true that the Guru is one’s own Self
 (ātman), 
what
is the principle underlying the doctrine which says that
,
however learned a disciple may be or whatever occult
powers
 
he may possess
, 
he cannot attain self-realization
(ātmasiddhi) 
without the grace of the Guru?
Although in absolute truth the state of the Guru is that of
oneself, it is very hard for the Self which has become the
individual soul (
jīva
) through ignorance to realize its true
state or nature without the grace of the Guru.
All mental concepts are controlled by the mere presence of
the real Guru. If he were to say to one who arrogantly claims
that he has seen the further shore of the ocean of learning or
one who claims arrogantly that he can perform deeds which
are well nigh impossible, “Yes, you learned all that is to be
learned, but have you learned (to know) yourself? And you
who are capable of performing deeds which are almost
impossible, have you seen yourself?,” they will bow their
heads (in shame) and remain silent. Thus it is evident that
only by the grace of the Guru and by no other
accomplishment is it possible to know oneself.
5.
What are the marks of the Guru’s grace?
It is beyond words or thoughts.
6.
If that is so
, 
how is it that it is said that the disciple
realizes his true state by the Guru’s grace?
It is like the elephant which wakes up on seeing a lion in
its dream. Even as the elephant wakes up at the mere sight
of the lion, so too is it certain that the disciple wakes up
from the sleep of ignorance into the wakefulness of true
knowledge through the Guru’s benevolent look of grace.
7.
What is the significance of the saying that the nature of
the real Guru is that of the Supreme Lord
 (
Sarveśvara
)
?
In the case of the individual soul which desires to attain
the state of true knowledge or the state of Godhood (Īśvara)
and with that object always practices devotion, the Lord,
who is the witness of that individual soul and identical with
it, comes forth, when the individual’s devotion has reached 
a
mature stage, in human form with the help of 
sat-
chitānanda
, His three natural features and form and name
which he also graciously assumes, and in the guise of
blessing the disciple, absorbs him in Himself. According to
this doctrine the Guru can truly be called the Lord.
8.
How
, 
then
, 
did some great persons attain knowledge
without a Guru?
To a few mature persons the Lord shines as the light of
knowledge and imparts awareness of the truth.
9.
What is the end of devotion
 (bhakti) 
and the path of
Siddhānta
 (
i.e
., 
Śaiva Siddhānta
)
?
It is to learn the truth that all one’s actions performed with
unselfish devotion, with the aid of the three purified
instruments (body, speech, and mind), in the capacity of the
servant of the Lord, become the Lord’s actions, and to stand
forth free from the sense of “I” and “mine.” This is also the
truth of what the Śaiva-Siddhāntins call 
parā-bhakti
(supreme devotion) or living in the service of God (
irai-
paninittal
).
10.
What is the end of the path of knowledge
 (jñāna) 
or
Vedānta?
It is to know the truth that the “I” is not different from the
Lord (Īśvara) and to be free from the feeling of being the
doer (
kartṛtva
, 
ahaṃkāra
).
11.
How can it be said that the end of both these paths is the
same?
Whatever the means, the destruction of the sense of “I”
and “mine” is the goal, and as these are interdependent, the
destruction of either of them causes the destruction of the
other; therefore, in order to achieve that state of Silence
which is beyond thought and word, either the path of
knowledge which removes the sense of “I” or the path of
devotion 
which removes the sense of “mine” will suffice. So
there is no doubt that the end of the paths of devotion and
knowledge is one and the same.
N
OTE
: So long as the “I” exists, it is necessary to accept the
Lord also. If anyone wishes to regain easily the supreme
state of identity (
sāyujya
) now lost to him, it is only proper
that he should accept this conclusion.
12.
What is the mark of the ego?
The individual soul of the form of “I” is the ego. The Self
which is of the nature of intelligence (
chit
) has no sense of
“I.” Nor does the insentient body possess a sense of “I.” The
mysterious appearance of a delusive ego between the
intelligent and the insentient being the root cause of all
these troubles, upon its destruction by whatever means, that
which really exists will be seen as it is. This is called
Liberation (
mokṣa
).
Practice
(A
BHYĀSA
)
1.
What is the method of practice?
As the Self of a person who tries to attain Self-realization
is not different from him and as there is nothing other than
or superior to him to be attained by him, Self-realization
being only the realization of one’s own nature, the seeker of
Liberation realizes, without doubts or misconceptions, his
real nature by distinguishing the eternal from the transient,
and never swerves from his natural state. This is known as
the practice of knowledge. This is the inquiry leading to Self-
realization.
2.
Can this path of inquiry be followed by all aspirants?
This is suitable only for the ripe souls. The rest should
follow different methods according to the state of their
minds.
3.
What are the other methods?
They are (a) 
stuti
, (b) 
japa
, (c) 
dhyāna
, (d) 
yoga
, (e) 
jñāna
,
and so forth.
(a) 
Stuti
 is singing the praises of the Lord with a great
feeling of devotion.
(b) 
Japa
 is uttering the names of the gods or sacred
mantras
 like 
om
 either mentally or verbally.
(While following the methods of 
stuti
 and 
japa
 the mind
will sometimes be concentrated [lit. closed] and sometimes
diffused [lit. open], The vagaries of the mind will not be
evident to those who follow these methods.)
(c) 
Dhyāna
 denotes the repetition of the names, etc.,
mentally (
japa
) with feelings of devotion. In this method the
state 
of the mind will be understood easily. For the mind
does not become concentrated and diffused simultaneously.
When one is in 
dhyāna
 it does not contact the objects of the
senses, and when it is in contact with the objects it is not in
dhyāna
. Therefore those who are in this state can observe
the vagaries of the mind then and there and, by stopping the
mind from thinking other thoughts, fix it in 
dhyāna
.
Perfection in 
dhyāna
 is the state of abiding in the Self (lit.
abiding in the form of “that,” 
tadākāranilai
).
As meditation functions in an exceedingly subtle manner at
the source of the mind, it is not difficult to perceive its rise
and subsidence.
(d) 
Yoga:
 The source of the breath is the same as that of
the mind; therefore the subsidence of either leads
effortlessly to that of the other. The practice of stilling the
mind through breath control (
praṇayāma
) is called yoga.
Fixing their minds on psychic centers such as the
sahasrāra
 (lit. the thousand-petaled lotus), yogis remain any
length of time without awareness of their bodies. As long as
this state continues they appear to be immersed in some
kind of joy. But when the mind which has become tranquil
emerges (becomes active again), it resumes its worldly
thoughts. It is therefore necessary to train it with the help of
practices like 
dhyāna
 whenever it becomes externalized. It
will then attain a state in which there is neither subsidence
nor emergence.
(e) 
Jñāna
 is the annihilation of the mind in which it is made
to assume the form of the Self through the constant practice
of 
dhyāna
 or inquiry (
vichāra
). The extinction of the mind is
the state in which there is a cessation of all efforts. Those
who are established in this state never swerve from their
true state. The terms 
silence
 (
mouna
) and 
inaction
 refer to
this state alone.
N
OTE
: (1) All practices are followed only with the object of
concentrating the mind. As all the mental activities like
remembering, forgetting, desiring, hating, attracting,
discarding, 
etc., are modifications of the mind, they cannot
be one’s true state. Simple, changeless being is one’s true
nature. Therefore, to know the truth of one’s being and to 
be
it is known as release from bondage and the destruction of
the knot (
granthi nāśam
). Until this state of tranquillity of
mind is firmly attained, the practice of unswerving abidance
in the Self and keeping the mind unsoiled by various
thoughts is essential for an aspirant.
(2) Although the practices for achieving strength of mind
are numerous, all of them achieve the same end. For it can
be seen that whoever concentrates his mind on any object
will, on the cessation of all mental concepts, ultimately
remain merely as that object. This is called successful
meditation (
dhyāna siddhi
). Those who follow the path of
inquiry realize that the mind which remains at the end of the
inquiry is 
Brahman
. Those who practice meditation realize
that the mind which remains at the end of the meditation is
the object of their meditation. As the result is the same in
either case, it is the duty of aspirants to practice
continuously either of these methods till the goal is reached.
4.
Is the state of being still a state involving effort or
effortless?
It is not an effortless state of indolence. All mundane
activities which are ordinarily called effort are performed
with the aid of a portion of the mind and with frequent
breaks. But the act of communion with the Self (
ātma
vyavahāra
) or remaining still inwardly is intense activity
which is performed with the entire mind and without break.
5.
What is the nature of
 māyā
?
Māyā
 is that which makes us regard as nonexistent the
Self, the Reality, which is always and everywhere present
and all-pervasive and self-luminous, and as existent the
individual soul (
jīνa
), the world (
jagat
), and God (
para
),
which have been conclusively proved to be nonexistent at all
times and places.
6.
As the Self shines fully of its own accord
, 
why is it not
generally recognized like the other objects of the world by
all persons?
Wherever particular objects are known, it is the Self which
has known itself in the form of those objects. For what is
known as knowledge or awareness is only the potency of the
Self (
ātma śakti
). The Self is the only sentient object. There
is nothing apart from the Self. If there are such objects, they
are all insentient and therefore cannot either know
themselves or mutually know one another. It is because the
Self does not know its true nature in this manner that it
seems to be immersed and struggling in the ocean of birth
(or death) in the form of the individual soul.
7.
Although the Lord is all-pervasive
, 
it appears
, 
from
passages like “adorning Him through His Grace,”
 
that He
can be known only through His grace. How
, 
then
, 
can the
individual soul by its own efforts attain self-realization in
the absence of the Lord’s Grace?
As the Lord denotes the Self and as Grace means the
Lord’s presence or revelation, there is no time when the
Lord remains unknown. If the light of the sun is invisible to
the owl, it is only the fault of that bird and not of the sun.
Similarly, can the unawareness by ignorant persons of the
Self, which is always of the nature of awareness, be other
than their own fault? How can it be the fault of the Self? It is
because Grace is of the very nature of the Lord that He is
well known as “the blessed Grace.” Therefore, the Lord,
whose nature itself is Grace, does not have to bestow His
Grace. Nor is there any particular time for bestowing His
Grace.
8.
What part of the body is the abode of the Self?
The heart on the right side of the chest is generally
indicated. This is because we usually point to the right side
of the chest when we refer to ourselves. Some say that the
sahasrāra
 (the thousand-petaled lotus) is the abode of the
Self. 
But if that were true, the head should not fall forward
when we go to sleep or faint.
9.
What is the nature of the heart?
The sacred texts describing it say: Between the two
nipples, below the chest and above the abdomen, there are
six organs of different colors.
1
 One of them resembling the
bud of a water lily and situated two digits to the right is the
heart. It is inverted and within it is a tiny orifice which is the
seat of dense darkness (ignorance) full of desires. All the
psychic nerves (
nāḍīs
) depend upon it. It is the abode of the
vital forces, the mind and the light (of consciousness).
But, although it is described thus, the meaning of the word
heart
 (
hṛdayam
) is the Self (
Ātman
). As it is denoted by the
terms 
existence
, 
consciousness
, 
bliss
, 
eternal
, and 
plenum
(
sat
, 
chit
, 
ānandam
, 
nityam
, 
pūrṇam
) it has no differences
such as exterior and interior or up and down. That tranquil
state in which all thoughts come to an end is called the state
of the Self. When it is realized as it is, there is no scope for
discussions about its location inside the body or outside.
10.
Why do thoughts of many objects arise in the mind even
when there is no contact with external objects?
All such thoughts are due to latent tendencies (
pūrva
saṃskāras
). They appear only to the individual
consciousness (
jīva
) which has forgotten its real nature and
become externalized. Whenever particular things are
perceived, the inquiry “Who is it that sees them?” should be
made; they will then disappear at once.
11.
How do the triple factors
 (
knower
, 
known
, 
and
knowledge
), 
which are absent in deep sleep
, samādhi,
etc
., 
manifest themselves in the Self
 (
in the states of
waking and dreaming
)
?
From the self there arise in succession
(a) 
chidābhāsa
 (reflected consciousness), which is a kind of
luminosity
(b) 
jīva
 (the individual consciousness) or the seer or the
first concept
(c) phenomena, that is, the world
12.
Since the Self is free from the notions of knowledge and
ignorance
, 
how can it be said to pervade the entire body
in the shape of sentience or to impart sentience to the
senses?
Wise men say that there is a connection between the
source of the various psychic nerves and the Self, that this is
the knot of the heart, that the connection between the
sentient and the insentient will exist until this is cut asunder
with the aid of true knowledge, that just as the suble and
invisible force of electricity travels through wires and does
many wonderful things, so the force of the Self also travels
through the psychic nerves and, pervading the entire body,
imparts sentience to the senses, and that if this knot is cut
the Self will remain as it always is, without any attributes.
13.
How can there be a connection between the Self
, 
which
is pure knowledge
, 
and the triple factors
, 
which are
relative knowledge?
This is, in a way, like the working of a cinema as shown in
the accompanying chart.
Just as the pictures appear on the screen as long as the
film throws the shadows through the lens, so the
phenomenal world will continue to appear to the individual
in the waking and dream states as long as there are latent
mental impressions. Just as the lens magnifies the tiny
specks on the film to a huge size and as a number of pictures
are shown in a second, so the mind enlarges the sproutlike
tendencies into treelike thoughts and shows in a second
innumerable worlds. Again, just as there is only the light of
the lamp visible when there is no film, so the Self alone
shines without the triple factors when the mental concepts in
the form of tendencies are absent in the states of deep sleep,
swoon, and 
samādhi
. Just as the lamp illuminates the lens,
etc., while remaining 
unaffected, the Self illumines the ego
(
chidābhāsa
), etc., while remaining unaffected.
C
INEMA
 S
HOW
S
ELF
a.
The lamp inside (the
apparatus)
a.
The Self
b.
The lens in front of the
lamp
b.
The pure (sattvic) mind
close to the Self
c.
The film, which is a long
series of separate photos
c.
The stream of latent
tendencies consisting of
subtle thoughts
d.
The lens, the light passing
through it, and the lamp,
which together form the
focused light
d.
The mind, the illumination
of it, and the Self, which
together form the seer or
the 
jīva
e.
The light passing through
the lens and falling on the
screen
e.
The light of the Self
emerging from the mind
through the senses and
falling on the world
f.
The various kinds of
pictures appearing in the
light of the screen
f.
The various forms and
names appearing as the
objects perceived in the
light of the world
g.
The mechanism which
sets the film in motion
g.
The divine law
manifesting the latent
tendencies of the mind
14.
What is
 dhyāna 
(meditation)
?
It is abiding as one’s Self without swerving in any way
from one’s real nature and without feeling that one is
meditating. 
As one is not in the least conscious of the
different states (waking, dreaming, etc.) in this condition,
the sleep (noticeable) here is also regarded as 
dhyāna
.
15.
What is the difference between
 dhyāna 
and
 samādhi
?
Dhyāna
 is achieved through deliberate mental effort; in
samādhi
 there is no such effort.
16.
What are the factors to be kept in view in
 dhyāna
?
It is important for one who is established in his Self (
ātma
niṣṭha
) to see that he does not swerve in the least from this
absorption. By swerving from his true nature he may see
before him bright effulgences, etc., or hear (unusual) sounds
or regard as real the visions of gods appearing within or
outside himself. He should not be deceived by these and
forget himself.
N
OTE
: (1) If the moments that are wasted in thinking of the
objects which are not the Self are spent on inquiry into the
Self, Self-realization will be attained in a very short time.
(2) Until the mind becomes established in itself, some kind
of 
bhāvanā
 (contemplation of a personified god or goddess
with deep emotion and religious feeling) is essential.
Otherwise the mind will be frequently assailed by wayward
thoughts or sleep.
(3) Without spending all the time in practicing 
bhāvanās
like “I am Shiva” or “I am 
Brahman
,” which are regarded as
nirguṇopāsana
 (contemplation of the attributeless Brahman),
the method of inquiry into oneself should be practiced as
soon as the mental strength which is the result of such
upāsana
 (contemplation) is attained.
(4) The excellence of the practice (
sādhana
) lies in not
giving room for even a single mental concept (
vṛtti
).
17.
What are the rules of conduct which an aspirant
(sādhaka) 
should follow?
Moderation in food, moderation in sleep, and moderation
in speech.
18.
How long should one practice?
Until the mind attains effortlessly its natural state of
freedom from concepts, that is, till the sense of “I” and
“mine” exists no longer.
19.
What is the meaning of dwelling in solitude
 (ekānta
vāsa)
?
As the Self is all-pervasive, it has no particular place for
solitude. The state of being free from mental concepts is
called dwelling in solitude.
20.
What is the sign of wisdom
 (vīveka)
?
Its beauty lies in remaining free from delusion after
realizing the truth once. There is fear only for one who sees
at least a slight difference in the Supreme 
Brahman
. So long
as there is the idea that the body is the Self, one cannot be a
realizer of truth, whoever he might be.
21.
If everything happens according to karma
 (prārabdha
:
the result of one’s acts in the past
), 
how is one to
overcome the obstacles to meditation
 (dhyāna)
?
Prārabdha
 concerns only the out-turned, not the in-turned
mind. One who seeks his real Self will not be afraid of any
obstacle.
22.
Is asceticism
 (sannyāsa) 
one of the essential requisites
for a person to become established in the Self
 (ātma
niṣṭha)
?
The effort that is made to get rid of attachment to one’s
body is really toward abiding in the Self. Maturity of thought
and inquiry alone removes attachment to the body, not the
stations of life (
āśramas
), such as student (
brahmachāri
), etc.
For the attachment is in the mind while the stations pertain
to the body. How can bodily stations remove the attachment
in the mind? As maturity of thought and inquiry pertain to
the mind, these alone can, by inquiry on the part of the 
same
mind, remove the attachments which have crept into it
through thoughtlessness. But, as the discipline of asceticism
(
sannyasāśrama
) is the means for attaining dispassion
(
vairāgya
), and as dispassion is the means for inquiry,
joining an order of ascetics may be regarded, in a way, as a
means of inquiry through dispassion. Instead of wasting
one’s life by entering the order of ascetics before one is fit
for it, it is better to live the householder’s life. In order to fix
the mind in the Self, which is its true nature, it is necessary
to separate it from the family of fancies (
saṃkalpas
) and
doubts (
vikalpas
), that is, to renounce the family (
saṃsāra
)
in the mind. This is the real asceticism.
23.
It is an established rule that so long as there is the least
idea of I-am-the-doer
, 
Self-knowledge cannot be attained
,
but is it possible for an aspirant who is a householder to
discharge his duties properly without this sense?
As there is no rule that action should depend upon a sense
of being the doer, it is unnecessary to doubt whether any
action will take place without a doer or an act of doing.
Although the officer of a government treasury may appear,
in the eyes of others, to be doing his duty attentively and
responsibly all day long, he will be discharging his duties
without attachment, thinking, “I have no real connection
with all this money” and without a sense of involvement in
his mind. In the same manner a wise householder may also
discharge without attachment the various household duties
which fall to his lot according to his past karma, like a tool in
the hands of another. Action and knowledge are not
obstacles to each other.
24.
Of what use to his family is a wise householder who is
unmindful of his bodily comforts
, 
and of what use is his
family to him?
Although he is entirely unmindful of his bodily comforts, if,
owing to his past karma, his family has to subsist by his
efforts, he may be regarded as doing service to others. If it is
asked whether the wise man derives any benefit from the
discharge of domestic duties, it may be answered that, as he
has already attained the state of complete satisfaction which
is the sum total of all benefits and the highest good of all, he
does not stand to gain anything more by discharging family
duties.
25.
How can cessation of activity
 (nivṛtti) 
and peace of mind
be attained in the midst of household duties
, 
which are of
the nature of constant activity?
As the activities of the wise man exist only in the eyes of
others and not in his own, although he may be accomplishing
immense tasks, he really does nothing. Therefore, his
activities do not stand in the way of inaction and peace of
mind. For he knows the truth that all activities take place in
his mere presence and that he does nothing. Hence he will
remain as the silent witness of all the activities taking place.
26.
Just as the Sage’s past karma is the cause of his present
activities
, 
will not the impressions
 (vāsanās) 
caused by
his present activities adhere to him in future?
Only one who is free from all the latent tendencies
(
vāsanas
) is a Sage. That being so, how can the tendencies of
karma affect him who is entirely unattached to activity?
27.
What is the meaning
 of brahmacharya?
Only inquiry into 
Brahman
 should be called 
brahmacharya
.
28.
Will the practice of
 brahmacharya 
which is followed in
conformity with the
 
(four)
 
orders of life
 (āśramas) 
be a
means of knowledge?
As the various means of knowledge, such as control of
senses, etc., are included in 
brahmacharya
, the virtuous
practices duly followed by those who belong to the order of
students (
brahmachārins
) are very helpful for their
improvement.
29.
Can one enter the order of ascetics
 (sannyāsa) 
directly
from the order of students
 (brahmacharya)
?
Those who are competent need not formally enter the
orders of 
brahmacharya
, etc., in the order laid down. One
who has realized his Self does not distinguish between the
various orders of life. Therefore, no order of life either helps
or hinders him.
30.
Does an aspirant
 (sādhaka) 
lose anything by not
observing the rules of caste and orders of life?
As the attainment (
anuṣṭhāna
, lit. practice) of knowledge is
the supreme end of all other practices, there is no rule that
one who remains in any one order of life and constantly
acquires knowledge is bound to follow the rules laid down
for that order of life. If he follows the rules of caste and
orders of life, he does so for the good of the world. He does
not derive any benefit by observing the rules. Nor does he
lose anything by not observing them.
Experience
(A
NUBHAVA
)
1.
What is the light of consciousness?
It is the self-luminous existence-consciousness which
reveals to the seer the world of names and forms both inside
and outside. The existence of this existence-consciousness
can be inferred by the objects illuminated by it. It does not
become the object of consciousness.
2.
What is knowledge
 (vijñāna)
?
It is that tranquil state of existence-consciousness which is
experienced by the aspirant and which is like the waveless
ocean or the motionless ether.
3.
What is bliss?
It is the experience of joy (or peace) in the state of 
vijñāna
free of all activities and similar to deep sleep. This is also
called the state of 
kevala nirvikalpa
 (remaining without
concepts).
4.
What is the state beyond bliss?
It is the state of unceasing peace of mind which is found in
the state of absolute quiescence, 
jagrat-suṣupti
 (lit. sleep
with awareness), which resembles inactive deep sleep. In
this state, in spite of the activity of the body and the senses,
there is no external awareness, as in the case of a child
immersed in sleep
2
 (who is not conscious of the food given to
him by his mother). A yogi who is in this state is inactive
even while engaged in activity. This is also called
sahajanirvikalpa samādhi
 (natural state of absorption in
oneself without concepts).
5.
What is the authority for saying that the entire moving
and unmoving worlds depend upon oneself?
The Self means the embodied being. It is only after the
energy, which was latent in the state of deep sleep, emerges
with the idea of “I” that all objects are experienced. The Self
is present in all perceptions as the perceiver. There are no
objects to be seen when the “I” is absent. For all these
reasons it may undoubtedly be said that everything comes
out of the Self and goes back to the Self.
6.
As the bodies and the selves animating them are
everywhere actually observed to be innumerable
, 
how can
it be said that the Self is only one?
If the idea “I am the body” is accepted,
3
 the selves are
multiple. The state in which this idea vanishes is the Self
since in that state there are no other objects. It is for this
reason that the Self is regarded as one only.
7.
What is the authority for saying that
 Brahman 
can be
apprehended by the mind and at the same time that it
cannot be apprehended by the mind?
It cannot be apprehended by the impure mind but can be
apprehended by the pure mind.
8.
What is pure mind and what is impure mind?
When the indefinable power of 
Brahman
 separates itself
from 
Brahman
 and, in union with the reflection of
consciousness (
chidābhāsa
), assumes various forms, it is
called the impure mind. When it becomes free from the
reflection of consciousness (
ābhāsa
), through discrimination,
it is called the pure mind. Its state of union with the
Brahman
 is its apprehension of 
Brahman
. The energy which
is accompanied by the reflection of consciousness is called
the impure mind, and its state of separation from 
Brahman
 is
its nonapprehension of 
Brahman
.
9.
Is it possible to overcome
, 
even while the body exists
, 
the
karma
 (prārabdha) 
which is said to last till the end of the
body?
Yes. If the agent (doer) upon whom the karma depends,
namely the ego, which has come into existence between the
body and the Self, merges in its source and loses its form,
will the karma which depends upon it alone survive?
Therefore when there is no “I” there is no karma.
10.
As the Self is existence and consciousness
, 
what is the
reason for describing it as different from the existent and
the nonexistent
, 
the sentient and the insentient?
Although the Self is real, as it comprises everything, it
does not give room for questions involving duality about its
reality or unreality. Therefore it is said to be different from
the real and the unreal. Similarly, even though it is
consciousness, since there is nothing for it to know or to
make itself known to, it is said to be different from the
sentient and the insentient.
Attainment
(Ā
RUDHA
)
1.
What is the state of attainment of knowledge?
It is firm and effortless abidance in the Self in which the
mind which has become one with the Self does not
subsequently emerge again at any time. That is, just as
everyone usually and naturally has the idea “I am not a goat
nor a cow nor any other animal but a man,” when he thinks
of his body, so also when he has the idea “I am not the
principles (
tattvas
) beginning with the body and ending with
sound (
nāda
), but the Self which is existence, consciousness,
and bliss,” the innate self-consciousness (
ātma prajña
), he is
said to have attained firm knowledge.
2.
To which of the seven stages of knowledge
 (jñāna-
bhūmikas)
4
 
does the sage
 (jñāni) 
belong?
He belongs to the fourth stage.
3.
If that is so
, 
why have three more stages superior to it
been distinguished?
The marks of the stages four to seven are based upon the
experiences of the realized person (
jīvanmukta
). They are
not states of knowledge and release. So far as knowledge
and release are concerned, no distinction whatever is made
in these four stages.
4.
As liberation is common to all
, 
why is the
 variṣṭha 
(lit. the
most excellent)
 alone praised excessively?
So far as the 
variṣṭha’s
 common experience of bliss is
concerned, he is extolled only because of the special merit
acquired by him in his previous births, which is the cause of
it.
5.
As there is no one who does not desire to experience
constant bliss
, 
what is the reason why all sages
 (jñānis)
do not attain the state of
 variṣṭha
?
It is not to be attained by mere desire or effort. Karma
(
prārabdha
) is its cause. As the ego dies along with its cause
even in the fourth stage (
bhūmika
), what agent is there
beyond that stage to desire anything or to make efforts? So
long as they make efforts they will not be sages (
jñānis
). Do
the sacred texts (
śrutis
) which specially mention the 
variṣṭha
say that the other three are unenlightened persons?
6.
As some sacred texts say that the supreme state is that in
which the sense organs and the mind are completely
destroyed
, 
how can that state be compatible with the
experience of the body and the senses?
If that were so there would not be any difference between
that state and the state of deep sleep. Further, how can it be
said to be the natural state when it exists at one time and
not at another? This happens, as stated before, to some
persons according to their karma (
prārabdha
) for some time
or till death. It cannot properly be regarded as the final
state. If it could, it would mean that all great souls and the
Lord, who were the authors of the Vedantic works (
jñāna
granthas
) and the Vedas, were unenlightened persons. If the
supreme state is that in which neither the senses nor the
mind exists and not the state in which they exist, how can it
be the perfect state (
paripurṇam
)
?
 As karma alone is
responsible for the activity or inactivity of the sages, great
souls have declared the state of 
sahaja-nirvikalpa
 (the
natural state without concepts) alone to be the ultimate
state.
7.
What is the difference between ordinary sleep and
waking sleep
 (jāgrat suṣupti)
?
In ordinary sleep there are not only no thoughts but also
no awareness. In waking sleep there is awareness alone.
That is why it is called awake while sleeping, that is, the
sleep in which there is awareness.
8.
Why is the Self described both as the fourth state
 (turīya)
and beyond the fourth state
 (turīyātita)
?
Turīya
 means that which is the fourth. The experiencers
(
jīvas
) of the three states of waking, dreaming, and deep
sleep, known as 
viśva
, 
taijasa
, and 
prajñā
,
5
 who wander
successively in these three states, are not the Self. It is with
the object of making this clear, namely that the Self is that
which is different from them and which is the witness of
these states, that it is called the fourth (
turīya
). When this is
known, the three experiencers disappear and the idea that
the Self is a witness, that it is the fourth, also disappears.
That is why the Self is described as beyond the fourth
(
turīyātita
).
9.
What is the benefit derived by the sage from the sacred
books
 (sruṭis)
?
The sage who is the embodiment of the truths mentioned
in the scriptures has no use for them.
10.
Is there any connection between the attainment of
super-natural powers
 (siddhis) 
and Liberation
 (mukti)
?
Enlightened inquiry alone leads to Liberation.
Supernatural powers are all illusory appearances created by
the power of 
māyā
 (
māyāśakti
). Self-realization which is
permanent is the only true accomplishment (
siddhi
).
Accomplishments which appear and disappear, being the
effect of 
māyā
, cannot be real. They are accomplished with
the object of enjoying fame, pleasures, etc. They come
unsought to some persons through their karma. Know that
union with 
Brahman
 is the real aim of all accomplishments.
This is also the state of Liberation (
aikya mukti
) known as
union (
sāyujya
).
11.
If this is the nature of liberation
 (mokṣa), 
why do some
scriptures connect it with the body and say that the
individual soul can attain liberation only when it does not
leave the body?
It is only if bondage is real that liberation and the nature
of its experiences have to be considered. So far as the Self
(
puruṣa
) is concerned, it has really no bondage in any of the
four states. As bondage is merely a verbal assumption
according to the emphatic proclamation of the Vedānta
system, how can the question of liberation, which depends
upon the question of bondage, arise when there is no
bondage? Without knowing this truth, to inquire into the
nature of bondage and liberation, is like inquiring into the
nonexistent height, color, etc., of a barren woman’s son or
the horns of a hare.
12.
If that is so, do not the descriptions of bondage and
release found in the scriptures become irrelevant and
untrue?
No, they do not. On the contrary, the delusion of bondage
fabricated by ignorance from time immemorial can be
removed only by knowledge, and for this purpose the term
liberation
 (
mukti
) has been usually accepted. That is all. The
fact that the characteristics of liberation are described in
different ways proves that they are imaginary.
13.
If that is so
, 
are not all efforts such as study
 (
lit. hearing
)
and reflection useless?
No, they are not. The firm conviction that there is neither
bondage nor liberation is the supreme purpose of all efforts.
As this purpose of seeing boldly, through direct experience,
that bondage and liberation do not exist, cannot be achieved
except with the aid of the aforesaid practices, these efforts
are useful.
14.
Is there any authority for saying that there is neither
bondage nor liberation?
This is decided on the strength of experience and not
merely on the strength of the scriptures.
15.
If it is experienced
, 
how is it experienced?
Bondage
 and 
liberation
 are mere linguistic terms. They
have no reality of their own. Therefore they cannot function
of their own accord. It is necessary to accept the existence of
some basic thing of which they are the modifications. If one
inquires, “For whom is there bondage and liberation?” it will
be seen, “They are for me.” If one inquires, “Who am I?,” one
will see that there is no such thing as the “I.” It will then be
as clear as an 
āmalaka
 fruit in one’s hand that what remains
is one’s real being. As this truth will be naturally and clearly
experienced by those who leave aside mere verbal
discussions and inquire into themselves inwardly, there is no
doubt that all realized persons uniformly see neither
bondage nor liberation so far as the true Self is concerned.
16.
If truly there is neither bondage nor liberation
, 
what is
the reason for the actual experience of joys and sorrows?
They appear to be real only when one turns aside from
one’s real nature. They do not really exist.
17.
Is it possible for everyone to know directly without doubt
what exactly is one’s true nature?
Undoubtedly it is possible.
18.
How?
It is the experience of everyone that even in the states of
deep sleep, fainting, etc., when the entire universe, moving
and stationary, beginning with earth and ending with the
unmanifested (
prakṛti
), disappears, he does not disappear.
Therefore the state of pure being which is common to all and
which is always experienced directly by everybody is one’s
true nature. The conclusion is that all experiences in the
enlightened as well as the ignorant state, which may be
described by newer and newer words, are opposed to one’s
real nature.
MAHARSHI’S GOSPEL

Work and Renunciation
Disciple
. What is the highest goal of spiritual experience for
man?
Maharshi
. Self-realization.
D
.
Can a married man realize the Self?
M
.
Certainly. Married or unmarried, a man can realize the
Self, because That is here and now. If it were not so, but
attainable by some effort at some time, and if it were new
and had to be acquired, it would not be worth pursuit,
because what is not natural is not permanent either. But
what I say is that the Self is here and now, and alone.
D
.
A salt-doll diving into the sea will not be protected by a
waterproof coat. This world in which we have to toil day in
and day out is like the ocean.
M
.
Yes, the mind is the waterproof coat.
D
.
So, then, one may be engaged in work and, free from
desire, keep up one’s solitude? But life’s duties allow little
time to sit in meditation or even to pray.
M
.
Yes. Work performed with attachment is a shackle,
whereas work performed with detachment does not affect
the doer. He is, even while working, in solitude. To engage
in your duty is the true 
namaskār
 . . . and abiding in God is
the only true 
asan
.
D
.
Should I not renounce my home?
M
.
If that had been your destiny the question would not
have arisen.
D
.
Why then did you leave your home in your youth?
M
.
Nothing happens except by divine dispensation. One’s
course of conduct in this life is determined by one’s
prārabdha
.
D
.
Is it good to devote all my time to the search for the Self?
If that is impossible, should I merely keep quiet?
M
.
If you can keep quiet, without engaging in any other
pursuit, it is very good. If that cannot be done, where is
the use of being quiet so far as Realization is concerned?
So long as a person is obliged to be active, let him not give
up attempts to realize the Self.
D
.
Do not one’s actions affect one in later births?
M
.
Are you born now? Why do you think of other births? The
fact is, there is neither birth nor death. Let him who is
born think of death and the palliative thereof!
D
.
Can you show us the dead?
M
.
Did you know your kinsmen before their birth that you
should seek to know them after their death?
D
.
How does a 
gṛhastha
 fare in the scheme of 
mokṣa
?
Should he not necessarily become a mendicant in order to
attain Liberation?
M
.
Why do you think you are a 
gṛhastha?
 Similar thoughts
that you are a 
sannyāsin
 will haunt you, even if you go out
as a 
sannyāsin
. Whether you continue in the household or
renounce it and go to the forest, your mind haunts you.
The ego is the source of thought. It creates the body and
the world, and it makes you think of being the 
gṛhastha
. If
you renounce, it will only substitute the thought of
sannyāsa
 for that of 
gṛhastha
, and the environment of the
forest for that of the household. But the mental obstacles
are always there for you. They even increase greatly in the
new surroundings. It is no help to change the
environment. The one obstacle is the mind; it must be got
over whether in the home or in the forest. If you can do it
in the forest, why not in the home? Therefore, why change
the environment? Your efforts can be made even now,
whatever be the environment.
D
.
Is it possible to enjoy 
samādhi
 while busy in worldly
work?
M
.
The feeling “I work” is the hindrance. Ask yourself, “Who
works?” Remember who you are. Then the work will not
bind you; it will go on automatically. Make no effort either
to work or to renounce; your effort is the bondage. What is
destined to happen will happen. If you are destined not to
work, work cannot be had even if you hunt for it; if you are
destined to work, you will not be able to avoid it; you will
be forced to engage yourself in it. So leave it to the Higher
Power; you cannot renounce or retain as you choose.
D
.
Bhagavan said yesterday that while one is engaged in
search of God “within,” “outer” work would go on
automatically. In the life of Śrī Chaitanya it is said that
during his lectures to students he was really seeking
Krishna (Self) within, forgot all about his body, and went
on talking of Krishna only. This raises a doubt whether
work can safely be left to itself. Should one keep part-
attention on the physical work?
M
.
The Self is all. Are you apart from the Self? Or can the
work go on without the Self? The Self is universal: so all
actions will go on whether you strain yourself to be
engaged in them or not. The work will go on of itself. Thus
Krishna told Arjuna that he need not trouble to kill the
Kauravas; they were already slain by God. It was not for
him to resolve to work and worry himself about it, but to
allow his own nature to carry out the will of the Higher
Power.
D
.
But the work may suffer if I do not attend to it.
M
.
Attending to the Self means attending to the work.
Because you identify yourself with the body, you think that
work is done by you. But the body and its activities,
including 
that work, are not apart from the Self. What
does it matter whether you attend to the work or not?
Suppose you walk from one place to another: you do not
attend to the steps you take. Yet you find yourself after a
time at your goal. You see how the business of walking
goes on without your attending to it. So also with other
kinds of work.
D
.
It is then like sleepwalking.
M
.
Like somnambulism? Quite so. When a child is fast
asleep, his mother feeds him; the child eats the food just
as well as when he is fully awake. But the next morning he
says to the mother, “Mother, I did not take food last
night.” The mother and others know that he did, but he
says that he did not; he was not aware. Still the action had
gone on.
A traveler in a cart has fallen asleep. The bulls move,
stand still, or are unyoked during the journey. He does not
know these events but finds himself in a different place
after he wakes up. He has been blissfully ignorant of the
occurrences on the way, but the journey has been
finished. Similarly with the Self of a person. The ever-
wakeful Self is compared to the traveler asleep in the cart.
The waking state is the moving of the bulls; 
samādhi
 is
their standing still (because 
samādhi
 means 
jagratsuṣupti
,
that is to say, the person is aware but not concerned in the
action; the bulls are yoked but do not move); sleep is the
unyoking of the bulls, for there is complete stopping of
activity corresponding to the relief of the bulls from the
yoke.
Or again, take the instance of the cinema. Scenes are
projected on the screen in the cinema show. But the
moving pictures do not affect or alter the screen. The
spectator pays attention to them, not to the screen. They
cannot exist apart from the screen, yet the screen is
ignored. So also, the Self is the screen where the pictures,
activities, etc., are seen going on. The man is aware of the
latter 
but not aware of the essential former. All the same
the world of pictures is not apart from the Self. Whether
he is aware of the screen or unaware, the actions will
continue.
D
.
But there is an operator in the cinema!
M
.
The cinema show is made out of insentient materials.
The lamp, the pictures, the screen, etc., are all insentient
and so they need an operator, the sentient agent. On the
other hand, the Self is absolute Consciousness, and
therefore self-contained. There cannot be an operator
apart from the Self.
D
.
I am not confusing the body with the operator; rather, I
am referring to Krishna’s words in chapter 18, verse 61, of
the 
Gītā
: “The Lord, O Arjuna, dwells in the Heart of every
being, and He by His delusive power spins round all
beings set as if on a machine.”
M
.
The functions of the body involving the need for an
operator are borne in mind; since the body is 
jada
 or
insentient, a sentient operator is necessary. Because
people think that they are 
jīvas
, Krishna said that God
resides in the Heart as the Operator of the 
jīvas
. In fact,
there are no 
jīvas
 and no Operator, as it were, outside
them; the Self comprises all. It is the screen, the pictures,
the seer, the actors, the operator, the light, the theater,
and all else. Your confounding the Self with the body and
imagining yourself the actor is like the seer representing
himself as an actor in the cinema show. Imagine the actor
asking if he can enact a scene without the screen! Such is
the case of the man who thinks of his actions apart from
the Self.
D
.
On the other hand, it is like asking the spectator to act in
the cinema picture. So we must learn sleep-waking!
M
.
Actions and states are according to one’s point of view. A
crow, an elephant, a snake, each makes use of one limb
for two alternate purposes. With one eye the crow looks
on either side; for the elephant the trunk serves the
purpose 
of both a hand and a nose; and the serpent sees
as well as hears with its eyes. Whether you say the crow
has an eye or eyes, or refer to the trunk of the elephant as
“hand” or “nose,” or call the eyes of the serpent its ears, it
means all the same. Similarly, in the case of the 
jñāni
,
sleep-waking or waking-sleep or dream-sleep or dreaming-
wakefulness, are all much the same thing.
D
.
But we have to deal with a physical body in a physical,
waking world! If we sleep while working is going on, or try
to work while asleep, the work will go wrong.
M
.
Sleep is not ignorance, it is one’s pure state;
wakefulness is not knowledge, it is ignorance. There is full
awareness in sleep and total ignorance in waking. Your
real nature covers both and extends beyond. The Self is
beyond both knowledge and ignorance. Sleep, dream, and
waking states are only modes passing before the Self: they
proceed whether you are aware of them or not. That is the
state of the 
jñāni
, in whom pass the states of 
samādhi
,
waking, dream, and deep sleep, like the bulls moving,
standing, or being unyoked, while the passenger is asleep.
These answers are from the point of view of the 
ajñāni;
otherwise such questions would not arise.
D
.
Of course, they cannot arise for the Self. Who would be
there to ask? But unfortunately I have not yet realized the
Self!
M
.
That is just the obstacle in your way. You must get rid of
the idea that you are an 
ajñāni
 and have yet to realize the
Self. You 
are
 the Self. Was there ever a time when you
were not aware of that Self?
D
.
So we must experiment in sleep-waking . . . or in day-
dreaming?
M
.
(Laughs)
D
.
I maintain that the physical body of the man immersed in
samādhi
 as a result of the unbroken “contemplation”
6
 
of
the Self, may become motionless for that reason. It may be
active or inactive. The mind established in such
contemplation will not be affected by the movements of
the body or the senses; nor is disturbance of the mind the
forerunner of physical activity. Whereas another person
asserts that physical activity certainly prevents 
samādhi
 or
unbroken contemplation. What is Bhagavan’s opinion? You
are the abiding proof of my statement.
M
.
Both of you are right: you refer to 
sahaja nirvikalpa
samādhi
 and the other refers to 
kevala nirvikalpa samādhi
.
In the latter case the mind lies immersed in the Light of
the Self (whereas the mind lies in the darkness of
ignorance in deep sleep); and the subject makes a
distinction between 
samādhi
 and activity after waking up
from 
samādhi
. Moreover, activity of the body, of the sight,
of the vital forces, and of the mind and the cognizance of
objects, all these are obstructions for one who seeks to
realize 
kevala nirvikalpa samādhi
.
     In 
sahaja samādhi
, however, the mind has resolved into
the Self and has been lost. The differences and
obstructions mentioned above do not, therefore, exist
here. The activities of such a Being are like the feeding of
a somnolent boy, perceptible to the onlooker but not to the
subject. The traveler sleeping in the moving cart is not
aware of the motion of the cart, because his mind is sunk
in darkness; whereas the 
sahaja jñāni
 remains unaware of
his bodily activities because his mind is dead, having been
resolved into the ecstasy of 
chidānanda
 (bliss of the Self).
7
Silence and Solitude
D
.
Is a vow of silence useful?
M
.
The inner silence is self-surrender. And that is living
without the sense of ego.
D
.
Is solitude necessary for a 
sannyāsin
?
M
.
Solitude is in the mind of a man. One might be in the
thick of the world and yet maintain perfect serenity of
mind; such a person is always in solitude. Another may
stay in the forest but still be unable to control his mind.
He cannot be said to be in solitude. Solitude is an attitude
of the mind; a man attached to the things of life cannot get
solitude, wherever he may be. A detached man is always
in solitude.
D
.
What is 
mouna
?
M
.
That state which transcends speech and thought is
mouna;
 it is meditation without mental activity.
Subjugation of the mind is meditation: deep meditation is
eternal speech. Silence is ever-speaking; it is the
perennial flow of “language.” It is interrupted by
speaking; for words obstruct this mute language. Lectures
may entertain individuals for hours without improving
them. Silence, on the other hand, is permanent and
benefits the whole of humanity. . . . By silence, eloquence
is meant. Oral lectures are not so eloquent as silence.
Silence is unceasing eloquence. It is the best language.
There is a state when words cease and silence prevails.
D
.
How then can we communicate our thoughts to one
another?
M
.
That becomes necessary if the sense of duality exists.
D
.
Why does not Bhagavan go about and preach the Truth
to the people at large?
M
.
How do you know I am not doing it? Does preaching
consist in mounting a platform and haranguing the people
around? Preaching is simple communication of
Knowledge; it can really be done in silence only. What do
you think of a man who listens to a sermon for an hour
and goes away without having been impressed by it so as
to change his life? Compare him with another who sits in a
holy presence and goes away after some time with his
outlook on life totally changed. Which is the better, to
preach loudly without effect or to sit silently sending out
inner force?
Again, how does speech arise? There is abstract
Knowledge, whence arises the ego, which in turn gives
rise to thought, and thought to the spoken word. So the
word is the great-grandson of the original Source. If the
word can produce effect, judge for yourself, how much
more powerful must be the Preaching through Silence!
But people do not understand this simple, bare truth, the
Truth of their everyday, ever-present, eternal experience.
This Truth is that of the Self. Is there anyone unaware of
the Self? But they do not like even to hear of this Truth,
whereas they are eager to know what lies beyond, about
heaven, hell, and reincarnation.
Because they love mystery and not the Truth, religions
cater to them so as eventually to bring them round to the
Self. Whatever the means adopted, you must at last return
to the Self: so why not abide in the Self here and now? To
be a spectator of, or to speculate about, the other world,
the Self is necessary; therefore, they are not different
from the Self. Even the ignorant man, when he sees the
objects, sees only the Self.
Mind Control
D
.
How can I control the mind?
M
.
There is no mind to control if the Self is realized. The
Self shines forth when the mind vanishes. In the realized
man the mind may be active or inactive; the Self alone
exists. For the mind, body, and world are not separate
from the Self; and they cannot remain apart from the Self.
Can they be other than the Self? When aware of the Self,
why should one worry about these shadows? How do they
affect the Self?
D
.
If the mind is merely a shadow, how then is one to know
the Self?
M
.
The Self is the Heart, self-luminous. Illumination arises
from the Heart and reaches the brain, which is the seat of
the mind. The world is seen with the mind; so you see the
world by the reflected light of the Self. The world is
perceived by an act of the mind. When the mind is
illumined, it is aware of the world; when it is not so
illumined, it is not aware of the world.
If the mind is turned in, toward the Source of
illumination, objective knowledge ceases and the Self
alone shines as the Heart.
The moon shines by reflecting the light of the sun.
When the sun has set, the moon is useful for displaying
objects. When the sun has risen, no one needs the moon,
though its disc is visible in the sky. So it is with the mind
and the Heart. The mind is made useful by its reflected
light. It is used for seeing objects. When turned inward, it
merges into the Source of illumination, which shines by
Itself, and the mind is then like the moon in the daytime.
When it is dark, a lamp is necessary to give light. But
when the sun has risen, there is no need for the lamp; the
objects are visible. And to see the sun no lamp is
necessary; it is enough if you turn your eyes toward the
self-luminous sun. Similarly with the mind: to see the
objects, the light reflected from the mind is necessary. To
see the Heart, it is enough that the mind is turned toward
it. Then the mind does not count and the Heart is self-
effulgent.
D
.
After leaving this 
āśrama
, in October, I was aware of the
Presence that prevails in Śrī Bhagavan’s Presence
enfolding me for about ten days. All the time, while busy
in my work, there was an undercurrent of that peace in
unity; it was almost like the dual consciousness which one
experiences while half-asleep during a dull lecture. Then,
it faded out entirely; and the old stupidities came in
instead. Work leaves no time for separate meditation. Is it
enough constantly reminding oneself “I am,” while at
work?
M
.
(After a short pause) If you strengthen the mind, that
peace will continue for all time. Its duration is
proportional to the strength of mind acquired by repeated
practice. And such a mind is able to hold on to the current.
In that case, engagement or no engagement in work, the
current remains unaffected and uninterrupted. It is not
the work that hinders but the idea that it is 
you
 who are
doing it.
D
.
Is a set meditation necessary for strengthening the mind?
M
.
Not if you keep the idea always before you that it is not
your work. At first, effort is needed to remind yourself of
it, but later on it becomes natural and continuous. The
work will go on of its own accord, and your peace will
remain undisturbed.
Meditation is your true nature. You call it meditation
now, because there are other thoughts distracting you.
When these thoughts are dispelled, you remain alone—
that is, in the state of meditation, free from thoughts; and
that is your real nature, which you are now trying to gain
by keeping away other thoughts. Such keeping away of
other thoughts is now called meditation. But when the
practice becomes firm, the real nature shows itself as true
meditation.
D
.
Other thoughts arise more forcibly when one attempts
meditation!
M
.
Yes, all kinds of thought arise in meditation. That is only
right; for what lies hidden in you is brought out. Unless it
rises up, how can it be destroyed? Thoughts rise up
spontaneously, as it were, but only to be extinguished in
due course, thus strengthening the mind.
D
.
There are times when persons and things take a vague,
almost transparent form, as in a dream. One ceases to
observe them as outside, but is passively conscious of
their existence, while not actively conscious of any kind of
self-hood. There is a deep quietness in the mind. Is it at
such times that one is ready to dive into the Self? Or is
this condition unhealthy, the result of self-hypnotism?
Should it be encouraged as yielding temporary peace?
M
.
There is Consciousness along with quietness in the mind;
this is exactly the state to be aimed at. The fact that the
question has been framed on this point, without realizing
that it is the Self, shows that the state is not steady but
casual.
The word 
diving
 is appropriate when there are outgoing
tendencies, and when, therefore, the mind has to be
directed and turned within, there is a dip below the
surface of externalities. But when quietness prevails
without obstructing the Consciousness, where is the need
to dive? If that state has not been realized as the Self, the
effort to do so may be called diving. In this sense the state
may be 
said to be suitable for realization or diving. Thus,
the last two questions you have put do not arise.
D
.
The mind continues to feel partial toward children,
possibly because the form of a child is often used to
personify the Ideal. How can this preference be outgrown?
M
.
Hold on to the Self. Why think of children and of your
reactions toward them?
D
.
This third visit to Tiruvannamalai seems to have
intensified the sense of egoism in me and made meditation
less easy. Is this an unimportant passing phase or a sign
that I should avoid such places hereafter?
M
.
It is imaginary. This place or another is within you. Such
imaginations must end; for places as such have nothing to
do with the activities of the mind. Also your surroundings
are not merely a matter of your individual choice; they are
there as a matter of course; and you should rise above
them and not get yourself entangled in them.
(A boy of eight and a half years sat in the hall at about
five in the evening, when Śrī Bhagavan went up the hill.
During His absence, the boy spoke on yoga and Vedānta in
pure, simple, and literary Tamil, quoting freely from the
sayings of saints and the sacred scriptures. When Śrī
Bhagavan entered the hall, after nearly three-quarters of
an hour, only silence prevailed. For the twenty minutes
the boy sat in Śrī Bhagavan’s presence, he spoke not a
word but was merely gazing at Him. Then tears flowed
from his eyes. He wiped them with his left hand and soon
after left the place saying that he still awaits Self-
realization.)
D
.
How should we explain the extraordinary characteristics
of the boy?
M
.
The characteristics of his last birth are strong in him.
But however strong they may be, they do not manifest
themselves save in a calm, still mind. It is within the
experience of all that attempts to revive memory
sometimes fail, while something flashes into the mind
when it is calm and quiet.
D
.
How can the rebellious mind be made calm and tranquil?
M
.
Either see its source so that it may disappear, or
surrender yourself so that it may be struck down. Self-
surrender is the same as Self-knowledge, and either of
them necessarily implies self-control. The ego submits
only when it recognizes the Higher Power.
D
.
How can I escape from 
saṃsāra
, which seems to be the
real cause for making the mind restless? Is not
renunciation an effective means to realize tranquillity of
mind?
M
.
Samsāra
 is only in your mind. The world does not speak
out saying, “Here I am, the world.” If it did so, it would be
ever there, making its presence felt by you even in your
sleep. Since, however, it is not there in sleep, it is
impermanent. Being impermanent, it lacks substance.
Having no reality apart from the Self, it is easily subdued
by the Self. The Self alone is permanent. Renunciation is
the nonidentification of the Self with the not-Self. When
the ignorance which identifies the Self with not-Self is
removed, not-Self ceases to exist, and that is true
renunciation.
D
.
Can we not perform actions without attachment even in
the absence of such renunciation?
M
.
An 
atma-jñāni
 alone can be a good 
karma-yogi
.
D
.
Does Bhagavan condemn Dvaita philosophy?
M
.
Dvaita can subsist only when you identify the Self with
the not-Self. Advaita is nonidentification.
Bhakti and Jñāna
D
.
Śrī Bhagavata
 outlines a way to find Krishna in the Heart
by prostrating to all and looking on all as the Lord
Himself. Is this the right path leading to Self-realization?
Is it not easier thus to adore Bhagavan in whatever meets
the “mind” than to seek the Supramental through the
mental inquiry “Who am I?”?
M
.
Yes, when you see God in all, do you think of God or do
you not? You must certainly think of God for seeing God
all around you. Keeping God in your mind becomes
dhyāna
, and 
dhyāna
 is the stage before Realization.
Realization can only be in and of the Self. It can never be
apart from the Self, and 
dhyāna
 must precede it. Whether
you make 
dhyāna
 on God or on the Self, it is immaterial;
for the goal is the same. You cannot by any means escape
the Self. You want to see God in all, but not in yourself? If
all
 is God, are you not included in that 
all?
 Being God
yourself, is it a wonder that 
all
 is God? This is the method
advised in 
Śrī Bhagavata
 and elsewhere by others. But
even for this practice there must be the seer or thinker.
Who is he?
D
.
How to see God, Who is all-pervasive?
M
.
To see God is to 
be
 God. There is no “all” apart from God
for Him to pervade. He alone 
is
.
D
.
Should we read the 
Gītā
 now and then?
M
.
Always.
D
.
What is the relation between 
jñāna
 and 
bhakti
?
M
.
The eternal, unbroken, natural state of abiding in the
Self is 
jñāna
. To abide in the Self you must love the Self.
Since God is verily the Self, love of the Self is love of God;
and that is 
Bhakti. Jñāna
 and 
bhakti
 are thus one and the
same.
D
.
While making 
nāma-japa
 for an hour or more I fall into a
state like sleep. On waking up I recollect that my 
japa
 has
been interrupted, so I try again.
M
.
“Like sleep,” that is right. It is the natural state. Because
you are now associated with the ego, you consider that the
natural state is something which interrupts your work. So
you must have the experience repeated until you realize
that it is your natural state. You will then find that 
japa
 is
extraneous, but still it will go on automatically. Your
present doubt is due to that false identity, namely of
identifying yourself with the mind that does the 
japa. Japa
means clinging to one thought to the exclusion of all other
thoughts. That is its purpose. It leads to 
dhyāna
, which
ends in Self-realization or 
jñāna
.
D
.
How should I carry on 
nāma-japa
?
M
.
One should not use the Name of God mechanically and
superficially without the feeling of devotion. To use the
Name of God one must call upon Him with yearning and
unreservedly surrender oneself to Him. Only after such
surrender is the Name of God constantly with the man.
D
.
Where, then, is the need for inquiry or 
vichāra
?
M
.
Surrender can take effect only when it is done with full
knowledge as to what real surrender means. Such
knowledge comes after inquiry and reflection and ends
invariably in self-surrender. There is no difference
between 
jñāna
 and absolute surrender to the Lord, that is,
in thought, word, and deed. To be complete, surrender
must be unquestioning; the devotee cannot bargain with
the Lord or demand favors at His hands. Such entire
surrender comprises all: it is 
jñāna
 and 
vairāgya
, Devotion
and Love.
Self and Individuality
D
.
 Does not death dissolve the individuality of a person, so
that there can be no rebirth, just as the rivers discharged
into the ocean lose their individualities?
M
.
But when the waters evaporate and return as rain on the
hills, they once more flow in the form of rivers and fall into
the ocean; so also the individualities during sleep lose
their separateness and yet return as individuals according
to their 
saṃskāras
 or past tendencies. Even so it is in
death; and the individuality of the person with 
saṃskāras
is not lost.
D
.
How can that be?
M
.
See how a tree whose branches have been cut grows
again. So long as the roots of the tree remain unimpaired,
the tree will continue to grow. Similarly, the 
saṃskāras
,
which have merely sunk into the Heart on death, but have
not perished for that reason, occasion rebirth at the right
time; and that is how 
jīvas
 are reborn.
D
.
How could the innumerable 
jīvas
 and the wide universe
whose existence is correlative to that of the 
jīvas
, sprout
up from such subtle 
saṃskāras
 sunk in the Heart?
M
.
Just as the big banyan tree sprouts from a tiny seed, so
do the 
jīvas
 and the whole universe with name and form
sprout up from the subtle 
saṃskāras
.
D
.
How does individuality emanate from the Absolute Self,
and how is its return made possible?
M
.
As a spark proceeds from fire, individuality emanates
from the Absolute Self. The spark is called the ego. In the
case of the 
ajñāni
, the ego identifies itself with some
object simultaneously with its rise. It cannot remain
without such association with objects.
This association is due to 
ajñāna
, whose destruction is
the objective of one’s efforts. If this tendency to identify
itself with objects is destroyed, the ego becomes pure and
then it also merges into its Source. The false identification
of oneself with the body is 
dehātma-buddhi
 or I-am-the-
body idea. This must go before good results can follow.
D
.
How am I to eradicate it?
M
.
You exist in 
suṣupti
 without being associated with the
body and the mind, but in the other two states you are
associated with them. If you were one with the body, how
could you exist without the body in 
suṣupti?
 You can
separate yourself from what is external to you but not
from that which is one with you. Hence the ego cannot be
one with the body. This must be realized in the waking
state. The three states are studied in order to gain this
knowledge.
D
.
How can the ego, which is confined to two of the states,
endeavor to realize That which comprises all the three
states?
M
.
The ego in its purity is experienced in the intervals
between two states or between two thoughts. The ego is
like the worm which leaves one hold only after it catches
another. Its true nature is known when it is out of contact
with objects or thoughts. You should realize this interval
as the abiding, unchangeable Reality, your true Being,
through the conviction gained by the study of the three
states, 
jāgrat
, 
svapna
, and 
suṣupti
.
D
.
Can I not remain in 
suṣupti
 as long as I like and also be
in it at will, just as I am in the waking state? What is the
jñāni
’
s
 experience of these three states?
M.
Suṣupti
 does exist in your waking state also. You are in
suṣupti
 even now. That should be consciously entered into
and reached in this very waking state. There is no real
going in and coming out of it. To be aware of 
suṣupti
 in
the 
jāgrat
 state is 
jāgrat-suṣupti
 and that is 
samādhi
.
The 
ajñāni
 cannot remain long in 
suṣupti
, because he is
forced by his nature to emerge from it. His ego is not dead
and it will rise again and again. But the 
jñāni
 crushes the
ego at its Source. It may seem to emerge at times in his
case also as if impelled by 
prārabdha
. That is, in the case
of the 
jñāni
 also, for all outward purposes 
prārabdha
would seem to sustain or keep up the ego, as in the case of
the 
ajñāni;
 but there is this fundamental difference, that
the 
ajñāni’
s ego when it rises up (really it has never
subsided except in deep sleep) is quite ignorant of its
Source: in other words, the 
ajñāni
 is not aware of his
suṣupti
 in his dream and waking states: in the case of the
jñāni
, on the contrary, the rise or existence of the ego is
only apparent, and he enjoys his unbroken, transcendental
Experience in spite of such apparent rise or existence of
the ego, keeping his attention (
lakṣya
) always on the
Source. This ego is harmless; it is merely like the skeleton
of a burnt rope—though with a form, it is useless to tie up
anything. By constantly keeping one’s attention on the
Source, the ego is dissolved in that Source like a salt-doll
in the sea.
D
.
What is the significance of the Crucifixion?
M
.
The body is the cross. Jesus, the son of man, is the ego or
I-am-the-body idea. When the son of man is crucified on
the cross, the ego perishes, and what survives is the
Absolute Being. It is the resurrection of the Glorious Self,
of the Christ—the Son of God.
D
.
But how is crucifixion justified? Is not killing a terrible
crime?
M
.
Everyone is committing suicide. The eternal, blissful,
natural State has been smothered by this ignorant life. In
this way the present life is due to the killing of the eternal,
positive Existence. Is it not really a case of suicide? So
why worry about killing?
D
.
Śrī Ramakrishna says that 
nirvikalpa samādhi
 cannot last
longer than twenty-one days; if persisted in, the person
dies. Is this a fact?
M
.
When the 
prārabdha
 is exhausted, the ego is completely
dissolved, without leaving any trace behind. This is the
final Liberation (
nirvāṇa
). Unless 
prārabdha
 is exhausted,
the ego will rise up, as it may appear to do in the case of
jīvanmuktas
.
Self-Realization
D
.
How can I attain Self-realization?
M
.
Realization is nothing to be gained afresh; it is already
there. All that is necessary is to get rid of the thought “I
have not realized.”
Stillness or Peace is Realization. There is no moment
when the Self is not. So long as there is doubt or the
feeling of non-Realization, the attempt should be made to
rid oneself of these thoughts. They are due to the
identification of the Self with the not-Self. When the not-
Self disappears, the Self alone remains. To make room, it
is enough that the cramping be removed; room is not
brought in from elsewhere.
D
.
Since Realization is not possible without 
vāsanā-kṣaya
,
how am I to realize that state in which the 
vāsanās
 are
effectively destroyed?
M
.
You are in that state now!
D
.
Does it mean that by holding on to the Self, the 
vāsanās
should be destroyed as and when they emerge?
M
.
They will themselves be destroyed if you remain as you
are.
D
.
How shall I reach the Self?
M
.
There is no reaching the Self. If the Self were to be
reached, it would mean that the Self is not here and now
but is yet to be obtained. What is got afresh will also be
lost. So it will be impermanent. What is not permanent is
not worth striving for. So I say the Self is not reached. You
are
 the Self; you are already That.
The fact is, you are ignorant of your blissful state.
Ignorance supervenes and draws a veil over the pure Self,
which is Bliss. Attempts are directed only to remove this
veil of ignorance, which is merely wrong knowledge. The
wrong knowledge is the false identification of the self with
the body, mind, etc. This false identification must go, and
then the Self alone remains.
Therefore Realization is for everyone; Realization makes
no differences between aspirants. This very doubt whether
you can realize and the notion “I have not realized” are
themselves the obstacles. Be free from these obstacles
also.
D
.
What is the use of 
samādhi
, and does thought subsist
then?
M.
Samādhi
 alone can reveal the Truth. Thoughts cast a veil
over Reality, and so It is not realized as such in states
other than 
samādhi
. In 
samādhi
 there is only the feeling “I
am” and no thoughts. The experience “I am” is 
being still
.
D
.
How can I repeat the experience of 
samādhi
 or the
stillness that I obtain here?
M
.
Your present experience is due to the influence of the
atmosphere in which you find yourself. Can you have it
outside this atmosphere? The experience is spasmodic.
Until it becomes permanent, practice is necessary.
D
.
One has at times vivid flashes of a consciousness whose
center is outside the normal self and which seems to be
all-inclusive. Without concerning ourselves with
philosophical concepts, how would Bhagavan advise me to
work toward getting, retaining, and extending those rare
flashes? Does 
abhyāsa
 in such experience involve
retirement?
M
.
Outside! For whom is the inside or outside? These can
exist only so long as there are subject and object. For
whom are these two again? On investigation you will find
that they resolve into the subject only. See who is the
subject; and this inquiry leads you to pure Consciousness
beyond the subject.
The 
normal self
 is the mind. This mind is with
limitations. But pure Consciousness is beyond limitations
and is reached by investigation as above outlined.
Getting:
 The Self is always there. You have only to
remove the veil obstructing the revelation of the Self.
Retaining:
 Once you realize the Self, it becomes your
direct and immediate experience. It is never lost.
Extending:
 There is no extending of the Self, for it is as
ever, without contraction or expansion.
Retirement:
 Abiding in the Self is solitude. Because
there is nothing alien to the Self. Retirement must be from
some one place or state to another. There is neither the
one nor the other apart from the Self. 
All
 being the Self,
retirement is impossible and inconceivable.
Abhyāsa
 is only the prevention of disturbance to the
inherent peace. You are always in your natural state
whether you make 
abhyāsa
 or not. . . . To remain as you
are, without question or doubt, is your natural state.
D
.
On realizing 
samādhi
, does one not obtain 
siddhis
 also?
M
.
In order to display 
siddhis
, there must be others to
recognize them. That means there is no 
jñāna
 in the one
who displays them. Therefore, 
siddhis
 are not worth a
thought: 
jñāna
 alone is to be aimed at and gained.
D
.
Does my Realization help others?
M
.
Yes, and it is the best help that you can possibly render
to others. Those who have discovered great truths have
done so in the still depths of the Self. But really there are
no “others” to be helped. For the Realized Being sees only
the Self, just as the goldsmith sees only the gold while
valuing it in various jewels made of gold. When you
identify yourself with the body, name and form are 
there.
But when you transcend the body-consciousness, the
“others” also disappear. The Realized One does not see
the world as different from himself.
D
.
Would it not be better if the saints mix with others?
M
.
There are no “others” to mix with. The Self is the only
Reality.
D
.
Should I not try to help the suffering world?
M
.
The Power that created you has created the world as
well. If It can take care of you, It can similarly take care of
the world also. . . . If God has created the world, it is His
business to look after it, not yours.
D
.
Is it not our duty to be patriots?
M
.
Your duty is 
to be
, and not to be this or that. “I am that I
am” sums up the whole truth: the method is summarized
in “be still.”
And what does Stillness mean? It means “Destroy
yourself”; because every name and form is the cause of
trouble. “I-I” is the Self. “I am this” is the ego. When the
“I” is kept up as the “I” only, it is the Self. When it flies off
at a tangent and says “I am this or that, I am such and
such,”—it is the ego.
D
.
Who then is God?
M
.
The Self is God. “I am” is God. If God is apart from the
Self, He must be a selfless God, which is absurd.
All that is required to realize the Self is to 
be still
. What
can be easier than that? Hence 
ātma-vidya
 is the easiest to
attain.
Guru and His Grace
D
.
What is 
Guru-kṛpa
? How does it lead to Self-realization?
M
.
Guru
 is the Self. . . . Sometimes a man becomes
dissatisfied with his life, and, not content with what he
has, he seeks the satisfaction of his desires, through
prayer to God, etc. His mind is gradually purified until he
longs to know God, more to obtain His grace than to
satisfy his worldly desires. Then, God’s grace begins to
manifest. God takes the form of a Guru and appears to the
devotee, teaches him the Truth, and, moreover, purifies
his mind by association. The devotee’s mind gains
strength and is then able to turn inward. By meditation it
is further purified and it remains still without the least
ripple. That calm expanse is the Self.
The Guru is both “external” and “internal.” From the
“exterior” he gives a push to the mind to turn inward;
from the “interior” he pulls the mind toward the Self and
helps in the quieting of the mind. That is 
guru-kṛpa
. There
is no difference between God, Guru, and the Self.
D
.
In the Theosophical Society they meditate in order to
seek Masters to guide them.
M
.
The Master is within; meditation is meant to remove the
ignorant idea that he is only outside. If he is a stranger
whom you await, he is bound to disappear also. Where is
the use for a transient being like that? But as long as you
think you are separate or that you are the body, so long is
the Master “without” also necessary, and he will appear as
if with a body. When the wrong identification of oneself
with the body ceases, the Master will be found as none
other than the Self.
D
.
Will the Guru help us to know the Self through initiation
and so forth?
M
.
Does the Guru hold you by the hand and whisper in your
ear? You may imagine him to be what you are yourself.
Because you think you are with a body, you think he has
also a body, to do something tangible to you. His work lies
within, in the spiritual realm.
D
.
How is the Guru found?
M
.
God, Who is immanent, in His grace takes pity on the
loving devotee and manifests Himself according to the
devotee’s development. The devotee thinks that He is a
man and expects a relationship as between two physical
bodies. But the Guru, who is God or the Self incarnate,
works from within, helps the man to see the error of his
ways, and guides him in the right path until he realizes the
Self within.
D
.
What should the devotee do, then?
M
.
He has only to live up to the words of the Master and
work within. The Master is both “within” and “without,” so
he creates conditions to drive you inward and at the same
time prepares the “interior” to drag you to the Center.
Thus he gives a push from “without” and exerts a pull
from “within,” so that you may be fixed at the Center.
You think that the world can be conquered by your own
efforts. When you are frustrated externally and are driven
inward, you feel, “Oh! there is a Power Higher than man!”
The ego is like a very powerful elephant which cannot
be brought under control by any less powerful than a lion,
which, in this instance, is no other than the Guru, whose
very look makes the elephantlike ego tremble and die.
You will know in due course that your glory lies where
you cease to exist. In order to gain that state, you should
surrender yourself. Then the Master sees that you are in a
fit state to receive guidance, and he guides you.
D
.
How can the Silence of the Guru, who gives no initiation
nor does any other tangible act, be more powerful than his
word? How is such Silence better than the study of
scriptures?
M
.
Silence is the most potent form of work. However vast
and emphatic the scriptures may be, they fail in their
effect. The Guru is quiet, and grace prevails in all. This
Silence is more vast and more emphatic than all the
scriptures put together.
D
.
But can the devotee obtain happiness?
M
.
The devotee surrenders himself to the Master, and it
means that there is no vestige of individuality retained by
him. If the surrender is complete, all sense of self is lost,
and then there can be no misery or sorrow. The Eternal
Being is nothing but Happiness. That comes as a
revelation.
D
.
How can I obtain grace?
M
.
Grace is the Self. That also is not to be acquired: you
only need to know that it exists.
The sun is brightness only. It does not see darkness. Yet
you speak of darkness fleeing on the sun’s approach. So
also the devotee’s ignorance, like the phantom of
darkness, vanishes at the look of the Guru. You are
surrounded by sunlight; yet if you would see the sun, you
must turn in its direction and look at it. So also grace is
found by the proper approach you make, though it is here
and now.
D
.
Cannot grace hasten ripeness in the seeker?
M
.
Leave it all to the Master. Surrender to him without
reserve.
One of two things must be done: either surrender
yourself, because you realize your inability and need a
Higher Power to help you; or investigate the cause of
misery, go into the Source, and so merge in the Self.
Either way, you 
will be free from misery. God or Guru
never forsakes the devotee who has surrendered himself.
D
.
What is the significance of prostration to the Guru or
God?
M
.
Prostration signifies the subsidence of the ego, and it
means merging into the Source. God or Guru cannot be
deceived by outward genuflections, bowing, and
prostrations. He sees whether the ego is there or not.
D
.
Will not Bhagavan give me some 
prasād
 from his leaf as a
mark of his grace?
M
.
Eat without thinking of the ego. Then what you eat
becomes Bhagavan’s 
prasād
.
D
.
Is not the literate man better qualified for Enlightenment
in the sense that he stands in no need of 
Guru-kṛpa?
M
.
Even a learned man must bow before the illiterate sage.
Illiteracy is ignorance and education is learned ignorance.
Both are ignorant of the true aim. The Sage is ignorant in
a different line. He is ignorant because there is no “other”
for him.
D
.
Is it not to obtain the guru’s grace that presents are
offered to him? So the visitors offer presents to Bhagavan.
M
.
Why do they bring presents? Do I want them? Even if I
refuse, they thrust the presents on me! What for? Is it not
like giving a bait to catch the fish? Is the angler anxious to
feed them? No, he is anxious to feed on the fish!
D
.
Is the Theosophical idea of giving successive initiations
before attaining 
mokṣa
 true?
M
.
Those who attain 
mokṣa
 in one life must have passed
through all the initiations in their former lives.
D
.
Theosophy says that 
jñānis
 after death have to choose
four or five lines of work, not necessarily in this world.
What is Bhagavan’s opinion?
M
.
Some may take up work, but not all.
D
.
Are you conscious of a brotherhood of invisible 
rṣis?
M
.
If invisible, how can you see them?
D
.
In consciousness.
M
.
There is nothing external in Consciousness.
D
.
Can I realize them?
M
.
If you realize your own Reality, then that of the 
rṣis
 and
Masters will become clear to you. There is only one
Master, and that is the Self.
D
.
Is reincarnation true?
M
.
Reincarnation exists only so long as there is ignorance.
There is really no reincarnation at all, either now or
before. Nor will there be any hereafter. This is the truth.
D
.
Can a yogi know his past lives?
M
.
Do you know the present life that you wish to know the
past? Find the present, then the rest will follow. Even with
your present limited knowledge, you suffer so much; why
should you burden yourself with more knowledge? Is it to
suffer more?
D
.
Does Bhagavan use occult powers to make others realize
the Self, or is the mere fact of Bhagavan’s Realization
enough for that?
M
.
The spiritual force of Self-realization is far more
powerful than the use of all the occult powers. Inasmuch
as there is no ego in the Sage, there are no “others” for
him. What is the highest benefit that can be conferred on
you? It is happiness, and happiness is born of peace.
Peace can reign only where there is no disturbance, and
disturbance is due to thoughts that arise in the mind.
When the mind itself is absent, there will be perfect peace.
Unless a person has annihilated the mind, he cannot gain
peace 
and be happy. And unless he himself is happy, he
cannot bestow happiness on “others.” Since, however,
there are no “others” for the Sage who has no mind, the
mere fact of his Self-realization is itself enough to make
the “others” happy.
Peace and Happiness
D
.
 How can I get peace? I do not seem to obtain it through
vichāra
.
M
.
Peace is your natural state. It is the mind that obstructs
the natural state. Your 
vichāra
 has been made only in the
mind. Investigate what the mind is, and it will disappear.
There is no such thing as mind apart from thought.
Nevertheless, because of the emergence of thought, you
surmise something from which it starts and term that the
mind. When you probe to see what it is, you find there is
really no such thing as mind. When the mind has thus
vanished, you realize eternal Peace.
D
.
Through poetry, music, 
japa
, 
bhajana
, the sight of
beautiful landscapes, reading the lines of spiritual verses,
etc., one experiences sometimes a true sense of all-unity.
Is that feeling of deep blissful quiet (wherein the personal
self has no place) the same as the entering into the Heart
of which Bhagavan speaks? Will practice thereof lead to a
deeper 
samādhi
 and so ultimately to a full vision of the
Real?
M
.
There is happiness when agreeable things are presented
to the mind. It is the happiness inherent to the Self, and
there is no other happiness. And it is not alien and afar.
You are diving into the Self on those occasions which you
consider pleasurable; that diving results in self-existent
bliss. But the association of ideas is responsible for
foisting that bliss on other things or occurrences while, in
fact, that bliss is within you. On these occasions you are
plunging into the Self, though unconsciously. If you do so
consciously, with the conviction that comes of the
experience that you are identical with the happiness which
is verily the Self, the one Reality, you call it Realization. I
want you to dive consciously into the Self, i.e., into the
Heart.
Self-Inquiry
D
.
How is one to realize the Self?
M
.
Whose Self? Find out.
D
.
Mine, but who am I?
M
.
Find out yourself.
D
.
I don’t know how.
M
.
Just think over the question. Who is it that says, “I don’t
know”? Who is the “I” in your statement? What is not
known?
D
.
Somebody or something in me.
M
.
Who is that somebody? In whom?
D
.
Perhaps some power.
M
.
Find out.
D
.
Why was I born?
M
.
Who was born? The answer is the same to all your
questions.
D
.
Who am I, then?
M
.
(Smiling) You have come to examine me? 
You
 must say
who you are.
D
.
However much I may try, I do not seem to catch the “I.”
It is not even clearly discernible.
M
.
Who is it that says that the “I” is not discernible? Are
there two “I’s” in you that one is not discernible by the
other?
D
.
Instead of inquiring “Who am I?,” can I put the question
to myself “Who are 
You?
,” since then my mind may be
fixed on You whom I consider to be God in the form of
Guru. Perhaps, I would be nearer the goal of my quest by
that inquiry than by asking myself “Who am I?”
M
.
Whatever form your inquiry may take, you must finally
come to the one “I,” the Self. All these distinctions made
between the “I” and “you,” Master and disciple, etc., are
merely a sign of one’s ignorance. The “I” Supreme alone
is. To think otherwise is to delude oneself.
A story from the Puranas about Sage Ribhu and his
disciple Nidagha is particularly instructive in this context.
Although Ribhu taught his disciple the supreme Truth of
the One Brahman without a second, Nidagha, in spite of
his erudition and understanding, did not get sufficient
conviction to adopt and follow the path of 
jñāna
, but
settled down in his native town to lead a life devoted to
the observance of ceremonial religion.
But the Sage loved his disciple as deeply as the latter
venerated his Master. In spite of his age, Ribhu would
himself go to his disciple in the town, just to see how far
the latter had outgrown his ritualism. At times the Sage
went in disguise, so that he might observe how Nidagha
would act when he did not know that he was being
observed by his Master.
On one such occasion Ribhu, who had put on the
disguise of a village rustic, found Nidagha intently
watching a royal procession. Unrecognized by the town-
dweller Nidagha, the village rustic inquired what the
bustle was all about, and was told that the king was going
in procession.
“Oh! It is the king. He goes in procession! But where is
he?” asked the rustic.
“There, on the elephant,” said Nidagha.
“You say the king is on the elephant. Yes, I see the two,”
said the rustic. “But which is the king and which is the
elephant?”
“What!” exclaimed Nidagha. “You see the two, but do
not know that the man above is the king and the animal
below is the elephant? What is the use of talking to a man
like you?”
“Pray, be not impatient with an ignorant man like me,”
begged the rustic. “But you said ‘above’ and ‘below’—what
do they mean?
Nidagha could stand it no more. “You see the king and
the elephant, the one 
above
 and the other 
below
. Yet you
want to know what is meant by ‘above’ and ‘below’?” burst
out Nidagha. “If things seen and words spoken can convey
so little to you, action alone can teach you. Bend forward,
and you will know it all too well.”
The rustic did as he was told. Nidagha got on his
shoulders and said, “Know it now. I am 
above
 as the king,
you are 
below
 as the elephant. Is that clear enough?” “No,
not yet,” was the rustic’s quiet reply. “You say you are
above like the king and I am below like the elephant. The
‘king,’ the ‘elephant,’ ‘above,’ and ‘below,’ so far it is
clear. But pray, tell me what you mean by ‘
I
’ and ‘
you
’?”
When Nidagha was thus confronted all of a sudden with
the mighty problem of defining the “you” apart from the
“I,” light dawned on his mind. At once he jumped down
and fell at his Master’s feet, saying, “Who else but my
venerable Master, Ribhu, could have thus drawn my mind
from the superficialities of physical existence to the true
Being of Self? O benign Master, I crave thy blessings.”
Therefore, while your aim is to transcend here and now
these superficialities of physical existence through 
ātma-
vichāra
, where is the scope for making the distinctions of
“you” and “I,” which pertain only to the body? When you
turn the mind within, seeking the Source of thought,
where is the “you” and where is the “I”?
You should seek and be the Self that includes all.
D
.
But is it not funny that the “I” should be searching for
the “I”? Does not the inquiry “Who am I?” turn out in the
end an empty formula? Or am I to put the question to
myself endlessly, repeating it like some 
mantra?
M
.
Self-inquiry is certainly not an empty formula; it is more
than the repetition of any 
mantra
. If the inquiry “Who am
I?” were a mere mental questioning, it would not be of
much value. The very purpose of Self-inquiry is to focus
the entire mind at its Source. It is not, therefore, a case of
one “I” searching for another “I.”
Much less is Self-inquiry an empty formula, for it
involves an intense activity of the entire mind to keep it
steadily poised in pure Self-awareness.
Self-inquiry is the one infallible means, the only direct
one, to realize the unconditioned, absolute Being that you
really are.
D
.
Why should Self-inquiry alone be considered the direct
means to 
jñāna?
M
.
Because every kind of 
sadhana
 except that of
ātmavichāra
 presupposes the retention of the mind as the
instrument for carrying on the 
sādhana
, and without the
mind it cannot be practiced. The ego may take different
and subtler forms at the different stages of one’s practice,
but is itself never destroyed.
When Janaka exclaimed, “Now I have discovered the
thief who has been ruining me all along. He shall be dealt
with summarily,” the king was really referring to the ego
or the mind.
D
.
But the thief may well be apprehended by the other
sādhanas
 as well.
M
.
The attempt to destroy the ego or the mind through
sādhanas
 other than 
ātma-vichāra
 is just like the thief
turning out a policeman to catch the thief, that is, himself.
Ātma-vichāra
 alone can reveal the truth that neither the
ego nor the mind really exists, and enables one to realize
the pure, undifferentiated Being of the Self or the
Absolute.
Having realized the Self, nothing remains to be known,
because it is perfect Bliss; it is the All.
D
.
In this life beset with limitations, can I ever realize the
Bliss of the Self?
M
.
That Bliss of the Self is always with you, and you will
find it for yourself, if you seek it earnestly.
The cause of your misery is not in the life without; it is
in you as the ego. You impose limitations on yourself and
then make a vain struggle to transcend them. All
unhappiness is due to the ego; with it comes all your
trouble. What does it avail you to attribute to the
happenings in life the cause of misery which is really
within you? What happiness can you get from things
extraneous to yourself? When you get it, how long will it
last?
If you would deny the ego and scorch it by ignoring it,
you would be free. If you accept it, it will impose
limitations on you and throw you into a vain struggle to
transcend them. That was how the thief sought to “ruin”
King Janaka.
To 
be
 the Self that you really are is the only means to
realize the Bliss that is ever yours.
D
.
Not having realized the Truth that the Self alone exists,
should I not adopt 
bhakti
 and 
yoga-margas
 as being more
suitable for purposes of 
sādhana
 than 
vichāra marga?
 Is
not the realization of one’s absolute Being that is, 
Brahma-
jñāna
, something quite unattainable to a layman like me?
M.
Brahma-jñāna
 is not a knowledge to be acquired, so that
acquiring it one may obtain happiness. It is one’s ignorant
outlook that one should give up. The Self you seek to know
is verily yourself. Your supposed ignorance causes you
needless grief, like that of the ten foolish men who grieved
the “loss” of the tenth man who was never lost.
The ten foolish men in the parable forded a stream and
on reaching the other shore wanted to make sure that all
of them had in fact safely crossed the stream. One of the
ten began to count, but while counting others left himself
out. “I see only nine; sure enough, we have lost one. Who
can it be?” he said. “Did you count correctly?” asked
another, and did the counting himself. But he too counted
only nine. One after the other, each of the ten counted
only nine, missing himself. “We are only nine,” they all
agreed, “but who is the missing one?” they asked
themselves. Every effort they made to discover the
“missing” individual failed. “Whoever he be that is
drowned,” said the most sentimental of ten fools, “we have
lost him.” So saying, he burst into tears, and the rest of
the nine followed suit.
Seeing them, weeping on the river bank, a sympathetic
way-farer inquired for the cause. They related what had
happened and said that even after counting themselves
several times they could find no more than nine. On
hearing the story, but seeing all the ten before him, the
way-farer guessed what had happened. In order to make
them know for themselves that they were really ten, that
all of them had come safe from the crossing, he told them,
“Let each of you count for himself but one after the other
serially, one, two, three and so on, while I shall give you
each a blow so that all of you may be sure of having been
included in the count, and included only once. The tenth
‘missing’ man will then be found.” Hearing this, they
rejoiced at the prospect of finding their “lost” comrade
and accepted the method suggested by the wayfarer.
While the kind wayfarer gave a blow to each of the ten
in turn, he that got the blow counted himself aloud. “Ten,”
said the last man as he got the last blow in his turn.
Bewildered, they looked at one another. “We 
are
 ten,”
they said with one voice and thanked the wayfarer for
having removed their grief.
That is the parable. From where was the tenth man
brought in? Was he ever lost? By knowing that he had
been there all the while, did they learn anything new? The
cause of their grief was not the real loss of any one of 
the
ten; it was their own ignorance, rather their mere
supposition that one of them was lost (though they could
not find who he was) because they counted only nine.
Such is also the case with you. Truly there is no cause
for you to be miserable and unhappy. You yourself impose
limitations on your true nature of infinite Being and then
weep that you are but a finite creature. Then you take up
this or that 
sādhana
 to transcend the nonexistent
limitations. But if your 
sādhana
 itself assumes the
existence of the limitations, how can it help you to
transcend them?
Hence I say know that you are really the infinite, pure
Being, the Self Absolute. You are always that Self and
nothing but that Self. Therefore, you can never be really
ignorant of the Self; your ignorance is merely a formal
ignorance, like the ignorance of the ten fools about the
“lost” tenth man. It is this ignorance that caused them
grief.
Know then that true Knowledge does not create a new
Being for you; it only removes your “ignorant ignorance.”
Bliss is not added to your nature; it is merely revealed as
your true and natural state, eternal and imperishable. The
only way to be rid of your grief is to 
know
 and 
be
 the Self.
How can this be unattainable?
Sādhana and Grace
D
.
Research on God has been going on from time
immemorial. Has the final word been said?
M
.
(Keeps silence for some time)
D
.
(Puzzled) Should I consider Śrī Bhagavan’s silence as the
reply to my question?
M
.
Yes. 
Mouna
 is 
Īsvara-svarūpa
. Hence the text: “The
Truth of Supreme 
Brahman
 proclaimed through Silent
Eloquence.”
D
.
Buddha is said to have ignored such inquiries about God.
M
.
And for this he was called a 
śūnyavādin
 (nihilist). In fact
Buddha concerned himself more with directing the seeker
to realize Bliss here and now than with academic
discussion about God, etc.
D
.
God is described as manifest and unmanifest. As the
former He is said to include the world as a part of His
Being. If that is so, we as part of that world should have
easily known Him in the manifested form.
M
.
Know yourself before you seek to decide about the
nature of God and the world.
D
.
Does knowing myself imply knowing God?
M
.
Yes, God is within you.
D
.
Then what stands in the way of my knowing myself or
God?
M
.
Your wandering mind and perverted ways.
D
.
I am a weak creature. But why does not the superior
power of the Lord within remove the obstacles?
M
.
Yes, He will, if you have the aspiration.
D
.
Why should He not create the aspiration in me?
M
.
Then surrender yourself.
D
.
If I surrender myself, is no prayer to God necessary?
M
.
Surrender itself is a mighty prayer.
D
.
But is it not necessary to understand His nature before
one surrenders oneself?
M
.
If you believe that God will do for you all the things you
want Him to do, then surrender yourself to Him.
Otherwise let God alone, and know yourself.
D
.
Has God or the Guru any solicitude for me?
M
.
If you seek either—they are not really two but one and
identical—rest assured that they are seeking you with a
solicitude greater than you can ever imagine.
D
.
Jesus gave the parable of the lost coin, wherein the
woman searches for it till it is found.
M
.
Yes, that aptly represents the truth that God or the Guru
is always in search of the earnest seeker. Were the coin a
dud piece, the woman would not have made that long
search. Do you see what it means? The seeker must
qualify himself through devotion, etc.
D
.
But one may not be quite sure of God’s grace.
M
.
If the unripe mind does not feel His grace, it does not
mean that God’s grace is absent, for it would imply that
God is at times not gracious, that is, ceases to be God.
D
.
Is that the same as the saying of Christ, “According to
thy faith be it done unto thee”?
M
.
Quite so.
D
.
The Upanishads say, I am told, that he alone knows the
Ātman
 whom the 
Ātman
 chooses. Why should the 
Ātman
choose at all? If it chooses, why some particular person?
M
.
When the sun rises, some buds alone blossom, not all. Do
you blame the sun for that? Nor can the bud blossom of
itself; it requires the sunlight to do it.
D
.
May we not say that the help of the 
Ātman
 is needed
because it is the 
Ātman
 that drew over itself the veil of
māyā?
M
.
You may say so.
D
.
If the 
Ātman
 has drawn the veil over itself, should not
itself remove the veil?
M
.
It will do so. See for whom is the veil.
D
.
Why should I? Let the 
Ātman
 itself remove the veil!
M
.
If the 
Ātman
 talks about the veil, then the 
Ātman
 itself
will remove it.
D
.
Is God personal?
M
.
Yes, He is always the first person, the “I,” ever standing
before you. Because you give precedence to worldly
things, God appears to have receded to the background. If
you give up all else and seek Him alone, He alone will
remain as the “I,” the Self.
D
.
The final state of Realization is said to be according to
Advaita the absolute union with the Divine and according
to Viśiṣṭādvaita a qualified union, while Dvaita maintains
that there is no union at all. Which of these should be
considered the correct view?
M
.
Why speculate as to what will happen some time in the
future? All are agreed that the “I” exists. To whichever
school of thought he may belong, let the earnest seeker
first find out what the “I” is. Then it will be time enough to
know what the final state will be, whether the “I” will get
merged in the Supreme Being or stand apart from Him.
Let us not forestall the conclusion, but keep an open mind.
D
.
But will not some understanding of the final state be a
helpful guide even to the aspirant?
M
.
No purpose is served in trying to decide now what the
final state of Realization will be. It has no intrinsic value.
D
.
Why so?
M
.
Because you proceed on a wrong principle. Your
ascertainment has to depend on the intellect, which shines
only by the light it derives from the Self. Is it not
presumptuous on the part of the intellect to sit in
judgment over that of which it is but a limited
manifestation, and from which it derives its little light?
How can the intellect, which can never reach the Self,
be competent to ascertain, much less decide, the nature of
the final state of Realization? It is like trying to measure
the sunlight at its source by the standard of the light given
by a candle. The wax will melt down before the candle
comes anywhere near the sun.
Instead of indulging in mere speculation, devote
yourself here and now to the search for the Truth that is
ever within you.
The Jñāni and the World
D
.
Is the world perceived by the 
jñāni
?
M
.
From whom is the question? Is it from a 
jñāni
 or 
ajñāni
?
D
.
From an 
ajñāni
, I admit.
M
.
Is it the world that seeks to decide the issue about its
reality? The doubt arises in you. Know in the first instance
who the doubter is, and then you may consider if the
world is real or not.
D
.
The 
ajñāni
 sees and knows the world and its objects,
which affect his senses of touch, taste, etc. Does the 
jñāni
experience the world in like manner?
M
.
You talk of seeing and knowing the world. But without
knowing yourself, the knowing subject (without whom
there is no knowledge of the object), how can you know
the true nature of the world, the known object? No doubt,
the objects affect the body and the sense organs, but is it
to your body that the question arises? Does the body say,
“I feel the object, it is real”? Or is it the world that says to
you, “I, the world, am real”?
D
.
I am only trying to understand the 
jñāni
’s point of view
about the world. Is the world perceived after Self-
realization?
M
.
Why worry yourself about the world and what happens
to it after Self-realization? First realize the Self. What
does it matter if the world is perceived or not? Do you gain
anything to help you in your quest by the nonperception of
the world during sleep? Conversely, what would you lose
now by the perception of the world? It is 
quite immaterial
to the 
jñāni
 or 
ajñāni
 if he perceives the world or not. It is
seen by both, but their viewpoints differ.
D
.
If the 
jñāni
 and the 
ajñāni
 perceive the world in like
manner, where is the difference between them?
M
.
Seeing the world, the 
jñāni
 sees the Self which is the
substratum of all that is seen; the 
ajñāni
, whether he sees
the world or not, is ignorant of his true being, the Self.
Take the instance of moving pictures on the screen in
the cinema show. What is there in front of you before the
play begins? Merely the screen. On that screen you see
the entire show, and for all appearances the pictures are
real. But go and try to take hold of them. What do you take
hold of? Merely the screen on which the pictures appeared
so real. After the play, when the pictures disappear, what
remains? The screen again!
So with the Self. That alone exists; the pictures come
and go. If you hold on to the Self, you will not be deceived
by the appearance of the pictures. Nor does it matter at
all if the pictures appear or disappear. Ignoring the Self,
the 
ajñāni
 thinks the world is real, just as, ignoring the
screen, he sees merely the pictures, as if they existed
apart from it. If one knows that without the Seer there is
nothing to be seen, just as there are no pictures without
the screen, one is not deluded. The 
jñāni
 knows that the
screen, the pictures, and the sight thereof are but the Self.
With the pictures the Self is in its manifest form; without
the pictures It remains in the unmanifest form. To the
jñāni
 it is quite immaterial if the Self is in the one form or
the other. He is always the Self. But the 
ajñāni
, seeing the
jñāni
 active, gets confounded.
D
.
It is just that point that prompted me to put my first
question, whether one who has realized the Self perceives
the world as we do, and if he does, I should like to know
how Śrī Bhagavan felt about the mysterious disappearance
of the photo yesterday. . . .
M
.
(Smiling) You are referring to the photo of the Madura
temple. A few minutes earlier it was passing through the
hands of the visitors, who looked at it in turn. Evidently, it
was mislaid among the pages of some book or other that
they were consulting.
D
.
Yes, it was that incident. How does Bhagavan view it?
There was an anxious search for the photo, which, in the
end, could not be found. How does Bhagavan view the
mysterious disappearance of the photo just at the moment
when it was wanted?
M
.
Suppose you dream that you are taking me to your
distant country, Poland. You wake up and ask me, “I
dreamt so and so. Did you also have some such dream or
know in some other way that I was taking you to Poland?”
What significance will you attach to such an inquiry?
D
.
But, with regard to the missing photo, the whole incident
took place in front of Śrī Bhagavan.
M
.
The seeing of the photo, its disappearance, as well as
your present inquiry, are all mere workings of mind.
There is a story in the Puranas which illustrates the
point. When Sita was missing from the forest hermitage,
Rama went about in search of her, wailing, “O Sita, Sita!”
It is said that Parvati and Parameshvara saw from above
what was taking place in the forest. Parvati expressed her
surprise to Shiva and said, “You praised Rama as the
perfect being. See how he behaves and grieves at the loss
of Sita!” Shiva replied, “If you are skeptical about Rama’s
perfection, then put him to the test yourself. Through your
yoga-māyā
 transform yourself into the likeness of Sita and
appear before him.” Parvati did so. She appeared before
Rama in the very likeness of Sita, but to her astonishment
Rama ignored her presence and went on as before, calling
out, “O Sita, O Sita!” as if he were blind.
D
.
I am unable to grasp the moral of the story.
M
.
If Rama were really searching for the bodily presence 
of
Sita, he would have recognized the person who was
standing in front of him as the Sita he had lost. But no, the
missing Sita was just as unreal as the Sita that appeared
before his eyes. Rama was not really blind; but to Rama,
the 
jñāni
, the prior being of Sita in the hermitage, her
disappearance, his consequent search for her as well as
the actual presence of Parvati in the guise of Sita, were all
equally unreal. Do you now understand how the missing
photo was viewed?
D
.
I cannot say it is all clear to me. Is the world that is seen,
felt, and sensed by us in so many ways something like a
dream, an illusion?
M
.
There is no alternative for you but to accept the world as
unreal, if you are seeking the Truth and the Truth alone.
D
.
Why so?
M
.
For the simple reason that unless you give up the idea
that the world is real your mind will always be after it. If
you take the appearance to be real you will never know
the Real itself, although it is the Real alone that exists.
This point is illustrated by the analogy of the snake and
the rope. As long as you see the snake, you cannot see the
rope as such. The nonexistent snake becomes real to you,
while the real rope seems wholly nonexistent as such.
D
.
It is easy to accept tentatively that the world is not
ultimately real, but it is hard to have the conviction that it
is really unreal.
M
.
Even so is your dream world real while you are
dreaming. So long as the dream lasts, everything you see
and feel therein is real.
D
.
Is then the world nothing better than a dream?
M
.
What is wrong with the sense of reality you have while
you are dreaming? You may be dreaming of something
quite impossible, for instance, of having a happy chat 
with
a dead person. Just for a moment you may doubt in the
dream, saying to yourself, “Was he not dead?” But
somehow your mind reconciles itself to the dream vision,
and the person is as good as alive for the purposes of the
dream. In other words, the dream as a dream does not
permit you to doubt its reality. Even so, you are unable to
doubt the reality of the world of your wakeful experience.
How can the mind which has itself created the world
accept it as unreal? That is the significance of the
comparison made between the world of wakeful
experience and the dream world. Both are but creations of
the mind, and so long as the mind is engrossed in either, it
finds itself unable to deny the reality of the dream world
while dreaming and of the waking world while awake. If,
on the contrary, you withdraw your mind completely from
the world and turn it within and abide thus, that is, if you
keep awake always to the Self, which is the substratum of
all experience, you will find the world, of which alone you
are now aware, just as unreal as the world in which you
lived in your dream.
D
.
As I said before, we see, feel, and sense the world in so
many ways. These sensations are the reactions to the
objects seen, felt, etc., and are not mental creations as in
dreams, which differ not only from person to person but
also with regard to the same person. Is that not enough to
prove the objective reality of the world?
M
.
All this talk about inconsistencies and their attribution to
the dream world arises only now, when you are awake.
While you were dreaming, the dream was a perfectly
integrated whole. That is to say, if you felt thirsty in a
dream, the illusory drinking of illusory water did quench
your illusory thirst. But all this was real and not illusory to
you so long as you did not know that the dream itself was
illusory. Similarly with the waking world; and the
sensations you now have get coordinated to give you the
impression that the world is real.
If, on the contrary, the world is a self-existent reality
(that is what you evidently mean by its objectivity), what
prevents the world from revealing itself to you in sleep?
You do not say you have not existed in your sleep.
D
.
Neither do I deny the world’s existence while I am
asleep. It has been existing all the while. If during my
sleep I did not see it, others who are not sleeping saw it.
M
.
To say you existed while asleep, was it necessary to call
in the evidence of others so as to prove it to you? Why do
you seek their evidence now? Those “others” can tell you
of having seen the world (during your sleep) only when
you yourself are awake. With regard to your own existence
it is different. On waking up you say you had a sound
sleep, so that to that extent you are aware of yourself in
the deepest sleep, whereas you have not the slightest
notion of the world’s existence then. Even now, while you
are awake, is it the world that says, “I am real,” or is it
you?
D
.
Of course 
I
 say it, but I say it of the world.
M
.
Well, then, that world, which you say is real, is really
mocking you for seeking to prove its reality while of your
own Reality you are ignorant.
You want somehow or other to maintain that the world
is real. What is the standard of Reality? That alone is Real
which exists by itself, which reveals itself by itself, and
which is eternal and unchanging.
Does the world exist by itself? Was it ever seen without
the aid of the mind? In sleep there is neither mind nor
world. When awake there is the mind and there is the
world. What does this invariable concomitance mean? You
are familiar with the principles of inductive logic, which
are considered the very basis of scientific investigation.
Why do you not decide this question of the reality of the
world in the light of those accepted principles of logic?
Of yourself you can say “I exist.” That is, yours is not
mere existence; it is Existence of which you are conscious.
Really, it is Existence identical with Consciousness.
D
.
The world may not be conscious of itself, yet it exists.
M
.
Consciousness is always Self-consciousness. If you are
conscious of anything, you are essentially conscious of
yourself. Unself-conscious existence is a contradiction in
terms. It is no existence at all. It is merely attributed
existence, whereas true Existence, the 
sat
, is not an
attribute, it is the Substance itself. It is the 
vastu
. Reality
is therefore known as 
sat-chit
, Being-Consciousness, and
never merely the one to the exclusion of the other. The
world neither exists by itself, nor is it conscious of its
existence. How can you say that such a world is real?
And what is the nature of the world? It is perpetual
change, a continuous, interminable flux. A dependent,
unself-conscious, ever-changing world cannot be real.
D
.
Not only does Western empirical science consider the
world real, but the Vedas give elaborate cosmological
descriptions of the world and its origin. Why should they
do so if the world is unreal?
M
.
The essential purpose of the Vedas is to teach you the
nature of the imperishable 
Ātman
, and to declare with
authority, “Thou art That.”
D
.
I accept. But why should they give cosmological
descriptions spun out at great length, unless they consider
the world real?
M
.
Adopt in practice what you accept in theory, and leave
the rest. The 
śastras
 have to guide every type of seeker
after Truth, and all are not of the same mental makeup.
What you cannot accept treat as 
artha-vāda
 or auxiliary
argument.
The Heart Is the Self
D
.
Śrī Bhagavan speaks of the Heart as the seat of
Consciousness and as identical with the Self. What does
the Heart exactly signify?
M
.
The question about the Heart arises because you are
interested in seeking the source of consciousness. To all
deep-thinking minds, the inquiry about the “I” and its
nature has an irresistible fascination.
Call it by any name, God, Self, the Heart, or the Seat of
Consciousness, it is all the same. The point to be grasped
is this, that Heart means the very core of one’s being, the
center, without which there is nothing whatever.
D
.
But Śrī Bhagavan has specified a particular place for the
Heart within the physical body, that it is in the chest, two
digits to the right from the median.
M
.
Yes, that is the center of spiritual experience according
to the testimony of Sages. This spiritual Heart center is
quite different from the blood-propelling, muscular organ
known by the same name. The spiritual Heart center is not
an organ of the body. All that you can say of the Heart is
that it is the very core of your being: that with which you
are really identical (as the word in Sanskrit literally
signifies),
8
 whether you are awake, asleep, or dreaming,
whether you are engaged in work or immersed in
samādhi
.
D
.
In that case, how can it be localized in any part of the
body? Fixing a place for the Heart would imply setting
physiological limitations to That which is beyond space
and time.
M
.
That is right. But the person who puts the question
about the position of the Heart, considers himself as
existing with or in the body. While putting the question
now, would you say that your body alone is here but that
you are speaking from somewhere else? No, you accept
your bodily existence. It is from this point of view that any
reference to a physical body comes to be made.
Truly speaking, pure Consciousness is indivisible; it is
without parts. It has no form and shape, no “within” and
“without.” There is no “right” or “left” for it. Pure
Consciousness, which is the Heart, includes all, and
nothing is outside or apart from it. That is the ultimate
Truth.
From this absolute standpoint, the Heart, Self, or
Consciousness can have no particular place assigned to it
in the physical body. What is the reason? The body is itself
a mere projection of the mind, and the mind is but a poor
reflection of the radiant Heart. How can That, in which
everything is contained, be itself confined as a tiny part
within the physical body which is but an infinitesimal,
phenomenal manifestation of the one Reality?
But people do not understand this. They cannot help
thinking in terms of the physical body and the world. For
instance, you say, “I have come to this 
aśrama
 all the way
from my country beyond the Himalayas.” But that is not
the truth. Where is a “coming” or “going” or any
movement whatever, for the one, all-pervading Spirit
which you really are? 
You
 are where you have always
been. It is your body that moved or was conveyed from
place to place till 
it
 reached this 
aśrama
.
This is the simple truth, but to a person who considers
himself a subject living in an objective world, it appears as
something altogether visionary!
It is by coming down to the level of ordinary
understanding that a place is assigned to the Heart in the
physical body.
D
.
How then shall I understand Śrī Bhagavan’s statement
that the 
experience
 of the Heart center is at the particular
place in the chest?
M
.
Once you accept that from the true and absolute
standpoint, the Heart as pure Consciousness is beyond
space and time, it will be easy for you to understand the
rest in its correct perspective.
D
.
It is only on that basis that I have put the question about
the position of the Heart. I am asking about Śrī
Bhagavan’s experience.
M
.
Pure Consciousness wholly unrelated to the physical
body and transcending the mind is a matter of direct
experience. Sages know their bodiless, eternal Existence
just as the layman knows his bodily existence. But the
experience of Consciousness can be with bodily awareness
as well as without it. In the bodiless experience of pure
Consciousness the Sage is beyond time and space, and no
question about the position of the Heart can then at all
arise.
Since, however, the physical body cannot subsist (with
life) apart from Consciousness, bodily awareness has to be
sustained by pure Consciousness. The former, by its
nature, is limited to and can never be coextensive with the
latter, which is infinite and eternal. Body consciousness is
merely a monadlike, miniature reflection of the pure
Consciousness with which the Sage has realized his
identity. For him, therefore, body consciousness is only a
reflected ray, as it were, of the self-effulgent, infinite
Consciousness which is himself. It is in this sense alone
that the Sage is aware of his bodily existence.
Since, during the bodiless experience of the Heart as
pure Consciousness, the Sage is not at all aware of the
body, that absolute experience is localized by him within
the limits of the physical body by a sort of feeling-
recollection made while he is with bodily awareness.
D
.
For men like me, who have neither the direct experience
of the Heart nor the consequent recollection, the matter
seems to be somewhat difficult to grasp. About the
position of the Heart itself, perhaps, we must depend on
some sort of guesswork.
M
.
If the determination of the position of the Heart is to
depend on guesswork even in the case of the layman, the
question is surely not worth much consideration. No, it is
not on guesswork that you have to depend, it is on an
unerring intuition.
D
.
For whom is the intuition?
M
.
For one and all.
D
.
Does Śrī Bhagavan credit me with an intuitive knowledge
of the Heart?
M
.
No, not of the Heart, but of the position of the Heart in
relation to your identity.
D
.
Śrī Bhagavan says that I intuitively know the position of
the Heart in the physical body?
M
.
Why not?
D
.
(Pointing to himself) It is to 
me
 personally that Śrī
Bhagavan is referring?
M
.
Yes. That is the intuition! How did you refer to yourself
by gesture just now? Did you not put your finger on the
right side of the chest? That is exactly the place of the
Heart center.
D
.
So, then, in the absence of direct knowledge of the Heart
center, I have to depend on this intuition?
M
.
What is wrong with it? When a schoolboy says, “It is I
who did the sum correctly,” or when he asks you, “Shall I
run and get the book for you?,” would he point to the head
that did the sum correctly, or to the legs that will carry
him swiftly to get you the book? No, in both cases, 
his
finger is pointed quite naturally toward the right side of
the chest, thus giving innocent expression to the profound
truth that the Source of “I”-ness in him is there. It is an
unerring
 intuition that makes him refer to himself, to the
Heart which is the Self, in that way. The act is quite
involuntary
 and 
universal
, that is to say, it is the same in
the case of every individual.
What stronger proof than this do you require about the
position of the Heart center in the physical body?
D
.
But I have heard it said by a saint that his spiritual
experience is felt at the place between the eyebrows.
M
.
As I said previously, that is the ultimate and perfect
Realization which transcends subject-object relation.
When that is achieved, it does not matter where the
spiritual experience is felt.
D
.
But the question is which is the correct view of the two,
namely, (1) that the center of spiritual experience is the
place between the eyebrows, (2) that it is the Heart.
M
.
For purposes of practice you may concentrate between
the eyebrows. It would then be 
bhāvanā
 or imaginative
contemplation of the mind; whereas the supreme state of
anubhava
 or Realization, with which you become wholly
identified and in which your individuality is completely
dissolved, transcends the mind. Then there can be no
objectified center to be experienced by you as a subject
distinct and separate from it.
D
.
I would like to put my question in slightly different
words. Can the place between the eyebrows be said to be
the seat of the Self?
M
.
You accept that the Self is the ultimate source of
consciousness and that it subsists equally during all the
three states of the mind. But see what happens when a
person in meditation is overcome by sleep. As the first
symptom of sleep his head begins to nod, which however
could not happen if the Self were situated between the
eyebrows or at any other place in the head.
If during sleep the experience of the Self is not felt
between the eyebrows, that center cannot be called its
seat without implying that the Self often forsakes its own
place, which is absurd.
The fact is the 
sādhaka
 may have his experience at any
center or 
chakra
 on which he concentrates his mind. But
for that reason that particular place of 
his
 experience does
not become 
ipso facto
 the seat of the Self.
There is an interesting story about Kamal, the son of
Saint Kabir, which serves as an illustration to show that
the head (and 
a fortiori
 the place between the eyebrows)
cannot be considered the seat of the Self.
Kabir was intensely devoted to Śrī Rama, and he never
failed to feed those who sang the praise of the Lord of his
devotion. On one occasion, however, it so happened that
he had not the wherewithal to provide food for such a
gathering of devotees. For him, however, there could be
no alternative except that he must somehow make every
necessary arrangement before the next morning. So he
and his son set out at night to secure the required
provisions.
The story goes that after the father and son had
removed the provisions from a merchant’s house through
a hole they made in the wall, the son went in again just to
wake up the household and tell them, as a matter of
principle, that their house had been burgled. When,
having roused the household, the boy tried to make good
his escape through the hole and join his father on the
other side, his body stuck up in the aperture. To avoid
being identified by the pursuing household (because, if
detected, there would be no feeding at all of the devotees
the next day), he called out to his father and told him to
sever his head and take it away with him. That done, Kabir
made good his escape with the stolen provisions and the
son’s head, which on reaching home, was hidden away
from 
possible detection. The next day Kabir gave a feast to
the 
bhaktas
, quite unmindful of what had happened the
previous night. “If it is Rama’s will,” said Kabir to himself,
“that my son should die, may it prevail!” In the evening
Kabir with the party set out as usual in procession into the
town with 
bhajana
, etc.
Meanwhile, the burgled householder made report to the
king, producing the truncated body of Kamal, which gave
them no clue. In order to secure its identification, the king
had the body tied up prominently on the highway so that
whoever claimed it or took it away (for no dead body is
forsaken without the last rites being given to it by the kith
and kin) might be interrogated or arrested by the police,
who were posted secretly for the purpose.
Kabir and his party with the 
bhajana
 in full swing came
by the highway, when, to the astonishment of all, Kamal’s
truncated body (which was considered dead as a doornail)
began to clap its hands, marking time to the tune sung by
the 
bhajana
 party.
This story disproves the suggestion that the head or the
place between the eyebrows is the seat of the Self. It may
also be noted that when in the battlefield the head of a
soldier in action is severed from the body by a sudden and
powerful stroke of the sword, the body continues to run or
move its limbs as in a mock fight, just for a while, before it
finally falls down dead.
D
.
But Kamal’s body was dead hours before.
M
.
What you call death is really no extraordinary experience
for Kamal. Here is the story of what had happened when
he was younger still.
As a boy Kamal had a friend of equal age with whom he
used to play games of marbles, etc. A general rule they
observed between themselves was that if one of them
owed the other a game or two, the same should be
redeemed the next day. One evening they parted with a
game to the credit of Kamal. Next day, in order to claim
“the return of the game,” Kamal went to the boy’s house,
where he saw the boy laid on the verandah, while his
relatives were weeping beside him.
“What is the matter?” Kamal asked them. “He played
with me last evening and also owes me a game.” The
relatives wept all the more, saying that the boy was dead.
“No,” said Kamal, “he is not dead but merely pretends to
be so, just to evade redeeming the game he owes me.” The
relatives protested, asking Kamal to see for himself that
the boy was really dead, that the body was cold and stiff.
“But all this is a mere pretension of the boy, I know; so
what if the body is stiff and cold? I too can become like
that.” So saying, Kamal laid himself down and in the
twinkling of an eye was dead.
The poor relatives, who were weeping till then for the
death of their own boy, were distressed and dismayed, and
now began to weep for Kamal’s death also. But up rose
Kamal, declaring, “Do you see it now? I was as you would
say dead, but I am up again, alive and kicking. This is how
he wants to deceive me, but he cannot elude me like this
with his pretensions.”
In the end, the story goes, Kamal’s inherent saintliness
gave life to the dead boy, and Kamal got back the game
that was due to him. The moral is that the death of the
body is not the extinction of the Self. Its relation to the
body is not limited by birth and death, and its place in the
physical body is not circumscribed by one’s experience felt
at a particular place, as for instance between the
eyebrows, due to the practice of 
dhyāna
 made on that
center. The supreme state of Self-awareness is never
absent; it transcends the three states of the mind as well
as life and death.
D
.
Since Śrī Bhagavan says that the Self may function at
any of the centers or 
chakras
 while its seat is in the Heart,
is it not possible that by the practice of intense
concentration or 
dhyāna
 between the eyebrows this center
may itself become the seat of the Self?
M
.
As long as it is merely the stage of practice of
concentration by fixing a place of controlling your
attention, any consideration about the seat of the Self
would merely be a theorization. You consider yourself as
the subject, the seer, and the place whereon you fix your
attention becomes the object seen. This is merely
bhāvanā
. When, on the contrary, you see the Seer himself,
you merge in the Self, you become one with it; that is the
Heart.
D
.
Then, is the practice of concentration between the
eyebrows advisable?
M
.
The final result of the practice of any kind of 
dhyāna
 is
that the object, on which the 
sādhaka
 fixes his mind,
ceases to exist as distinct and separate from the subject.
They (the subject and object) become the one Self, and
that is the Heart.
The practice of concentration on the center between the
eyebrows is one of the methods of 
sādhana
, and thereby
thoughts are effectively controlled for the time being. The
reason is this: All thought is an extroverted activity of the
mind; and thought, in the first instance, follows “sight”—
physical or mental.
It should, however, be noted that this 
sādhana
 of fixing
one’s attention between the eyebrows must be
accompanied by 
japa
. Because next in importance to the
physical eye
 is the 
physical ear
, either for controlling or
distracting the mind. Next in importance of the 
eye of the
mind
 (that is, mental visualization of the object) is the 
ear
of the mind
 (that is, mental articulation of speech), either
to control and thereby strengthen the mind, or to distract
and thereby dissipate it.
Therefore, while fixing the mind’s eye on a center, as
for instance between the eyebrows, you should also
practice the mental articulation of a 
nāma
 (Name) or
mantra
 (sacred syllable or syllables). Otherwise you will
soon lose your hold on the object of concentration.
Sādhana
 as described above leads to identification of
the Name, Word, or Self—whatever you may call it—with
the center selected for purposes of 
dhyāna
. Pure
Consciousness, the Self, or the Heart is the final
Realization.
D
.
Why does not Śrī Bhagavan direct us to practice
concentration on some particular center of 
chakra?
M
.
Yoga Śastras say that the 
sahasrāra
 or the brain is the
seat of the Self. Puruṣa Sūkta declares that the Heart is its
seat. To enable the 
sādhaka
 to steer clear of possible
doubt, I tell him to take up the “thread” or the clue of
“I”ness or “I-am”-ness and follow it up to its source;
because, firstly, it is impossible for anybody to entertain
any doubt about this “I”-notion; secondly, whatever the
sādhana
 adopted, the final goal is the realization of the
Source of “I-am”-ness, which is the primary datum of your
experience.
If you, therefore practice 
Ātma-vichāra
, you will reach
the Heart, which is the Self.
Aham and Aham-vṛtti
D
.
How can any inquiry initiated by the ego reveal its own
unreality?
M
.
The ego’s phenomenal existence is transcended when
you dive into the Source wherefrom arises the 
aham-vṛtti
.
D
.
But is not the 
aham-vṛtti
 only one of the three forms in
which the ego manifests itself? Yoga Vasishtha and other
ancient texts describe the ego as having a threefold form.
M
.
It is so. The ego is described as having three bodies—the
gross, the subtle, and the causal—but that is only for the
purposes of analytical exposition. If the method of inquiry
were to depend on the ego’s form, you may take it that
any inquiry would become altogether impossible, because
the forms the ego may assume are legion. Therefore, for
purposes of 
jñāna-vichāra
, you have to proceed on the
basis that the ego has but one form, namely that of 
aham-
vṛtti
.
D
.
But it may prove inadequate for realizing 
jñāna
.
M
.
Self-inquiry by following the clue of 
aham-vṛtti
 is just
like the dog tracing its master by his scent. The master
may be at some distant, unknown place, but that does not
at all stand in the way of the dog’s tracing him. The
master’s scent is an infallible clue for the animal, and
nothing else, such as the clothes he wears or his build and
stature, counts. To that scent the dog holds on
undistractedly while searching for him, and finally it
succeeds in tracing him.
D
.
The question still remains why the quest for the source of
aham-vṛtti
, as distinguished from other 
vṛttis
, should be
considered the direct means to Self-realization.
M
.
The word 
aham
 is itself very suggestive. The two letters
of the word, namely 
A
 and 
HA
, are the first and the last
letters of the Sanskrit alphabet. The suggestion intended
to be conveyed by the word is that it comprises all. How?
Because 
aham
 signifies existence itself.
Although the concept of “I”-ness or “I-am”-ness is by
usage known as 
aham-vṛtti
, it is not really a 
vṛtti
 like the
other 
vṛttis
 of the mind. Because unlike the other 
vṛttis
,
which have no essential interrelation, the 
aham-vṛtti
 is
equally and essentially related to each and every 
vṛtti
 of
the mind. Without the 
aham-vṛtti
 there can be no other
vritti
, but the 
aham-vṛtti
 can subsist by itself without
depending on any other 
vṛtti
 of the mind. The 
aham-vṛtti
 is
therefore fundamentally different from other 
vṛttis
.
So, then, the search for the source of the 
aham-vṛtti
 is
the search not merely for the basis of one of the forms of
the ego but for the very source itself from which arises the
“I-am”-ness. In other words, the quest for and the
realization of the Source of the ego in the form of 
aham-
vṛtti
 necessarily implies the transcendence of the ego in
everyone of its possible forms.
D
.
Conceding that the 
aham-vṛtti
 essentially comprises all
the forms of the ego, why should that 
vṛtti
 alone be chosen
as the means for Self-inquiry?
M
.
Because it is the one irreducible datum of your
experience; because seeking its source is the only
practicable course you can adopt to realize the Self. The
ego is said to have a causal body, but how can you make it
the subject of your investigation? When the ego adopts
that form, you are immersed in the darkness of sleep.
D
.
But is not the ego in its subtle and causal forms too
intangible to be tackled through the inquiry into the
source of 
aham-vṛtti
 conducted while the mind is awake?
M
.
No. The inquiry into the source of 
aham-vṛtti
 touches the
very existence of the ego. Therefore the subtlety of the
ego’s form is not a material consideration.
D
.
 While the one aim is to realize the unconditioned, pure
Being of the Self, which is in no way dependent on the
ego, how can inquiry pertaining to the ego in the form of
aham-vṛtti
 be of any use?
M
.
From the functional point of view of the form, activity, or
whatever else you may call it (it is immaterial, since it is
evanescent), the ego has one and only one characteristic.
The ego functions as the knot between the Self, which is
pure Consciousness, and the physical body, which is inert
and insentient. The ego is therefore called the 
chitjada
granthi
. In your investigation into the Source of 
aham-
vṛtti
, you take the essential 
chit
 aspect of the ego: and for
this reason the inquiry must lead to the realization of the
pure Consciousness of the Self.
D
.
What is the relation between the pure Consciousness
realized by the 
jñāni
 and the “I-am”-ness which is
accepted as the primary datum of experience?
M
.
The undifferentiated Consciousness of pure Being is the
Heart of 
hṛdayam
 which you really are, as signified by the
word itself (
hṛt
 + 
ayam
 = Heart am I). From the Heart
arises the “I-am”-ness as the primary datum of one’s
experience. By itself it is 
śuddha-sattva
 in character. It is
in this 
śuddha-sattva svarupa
 (that is, uncontaminated by
rajas
 and 
tamas
), that the “I” appears to subsist in the
jñāni. . . 
.
D
.
In the 
jñāni
 the ego subsists in the sattvic form and
therefore it appears as something real. Am I right?
M
.
No. The existence of the ego in any form, either in the
jñāni
 or 
ajñāni
 is itself an appearance. But to the 
ajñāni
who is deluded into thinking that the waking state and the
world are real, the ego also appears to be real. Since he
sees the 
jñāni
 act like other individuals, he feels
constrained to posit some notion of individuality with
reference to the 
jñāni
 also.
D
.
How then does the 
aham-vṛtti
 function in the 
jñāni
?
M
.
It does not function in him at all. The 
jñāni
’
s lakṣya
 is the
Heart itself, because he is one and identical with that
undifferentiated, pure Consciousness referred to by the
Upanishads as the 
prajñāna. Prajñāna
 is verily 
Brahman
,
the Absolute, and there is no 
Brahman
 other than
prajñāna
.
D
.
How then does ignorance of this one and only Reality
unhappily arise in the case of the 
ajñāni
?
M
.
The 
ajñāni
 sees only the mind, which is the mere
reflection of the Light of pure Consciousness arising from
the Heart. Of the Heart itself he is ignorant. Why?
Because his mind is extroverted and has never sought its
source.
D
.
What prevents the infinite, undifferentiated Light of
Consciousness arising from the Heart from revealing itself
to the 
ajñāni?
M
.
Just as water in the pot reflects the enormous sun within
the narrow limits of the pot, even so the 
vāsanās
 or latent
tendencies of the mind of the individual, acting as the
reflecting medium, catch the all-pervading, infinite Light
of Consciousness arising from the Heart and present in
the form of a reflection the phenomenon called the mind.
Seeing only this reflection, the 
ajñāni
 is deluded into the
belief that he is a finite being, the 
jīva
.
If the mind becomes introverted through inquiry into
the source of 
aham-vṛtti
, the 
vāsanās
 become extinct, and
in the absence of the reflecting medium the phenomenon
of reflection, namely the mind, also disappears being
absorbed into the Light of the one Reality, the Heart.
This is the sum and substance of all that an aspirant
need know. What is imperatively required of him is an
earnest and one-pointed inquiry into the source of 
aham-
vṛtti
.
D
.
But any endeavor he may make is limited to the mind in
the waking state. How can such inquiry conducted in only
one of the three states of the mind destroy the mind itself?
M
.
Inquiry into the source of 
aham-vṛtti
 is no doubt initiated
by the 
sādhaka
 in the waking state of the mind. It cannot
be said that in him the mind has been destroyed. But the
process of self-inquiry itself will reveal that the alternation
or transmutation of the three states of the mind as well as
the three states themselves belongs to the world of
phenomena, which cannot affect his intense, inward
inquiry.
Self-inquiry is really possible only through intense
introversion of the mind. What is finally realized as a
result of such inquiry into the source of 
aham-vṛtti
 is verily
the Heart as the undifferentiated Light of pure
Consciousness, into which the reflected light of the mind
is completely absorbed.
D
.
For the 
jñāni
, then, there is no distinction between the
three states of mind?
M
.
How can there be, when the mind itself is dissolved and
lost in the Light of Consciousness?
For the 
jñāni
 all the three states are equally unreal. But
the 
ajñāni
 is unable to comprehend this, because for him
the standard of reality is the waking state, whereas for the
jñāni
 the standard of Reality is Reality itself. This Reality
of pure Consciousness is eternal by its nature and
therefore subsists equally during what you call waking,
dreaming, and sleep. To him who is one with that Reality
there is neither the mind nor its three states and,
therefore, neither introversion nor extroversion.
His is the ever-waking state, because he is awake to the
eternal Self; his is the ever dreaming state, because to him
the world is no better than a repeatedly presented
phenomenon of dream; his is the ever-sleeping state,
because he is at all times without the “body-am-I”
consciousness.
D
.
Should I then consider Śrī Bhagavan as talking to me in a
waking-dreaming-sleeping state?
M
.
Because your conscious experience is now limited to the
duration of the extroversion of the mind, you call the
present moment the waking state, whereas all the while
your mind has been asleep to the Self, and therefore you
are now really fast asleep.
D
.
To me sleep is a mere blankness.
M
.
That is so, because your waking state is a mere
effervescence of the restless mind.
D
.
What I mean by blankness is that I am hardly aware of
anything in my sleep; it is for me the same as
nonexistence.
M
.
But you did exist during sleep.
D
.
If I did, I was not aware of it.
M
.
You do not mean to say in all seriousness you ceased to
exist during your sleep! (Laughing) If you went to sleep as
Mr. X, did you get up from it as Mr. Y?
D
.
I know my identity, perhaps, by an act of memory.
M
.
Granting that, how is it possible unless there is a
continuity of awareness?
D
.
But I was unaware of that awareness.
M
.
No. Who says you are unaware in sleep? It is your mind.
But there was no mind in your sleep? Of what value is the
testimony of the mind about your existence or experience
during sleep? Seeking the testimony of the mind to
disprove your existence or awareness during sleep is just
like calling your son’s evidence to disprove your birth!
Do you remember, I told you once previously that
existence and awareness are not two different things but
one and the same? Well, if for any reason you feel
constrained to admit the fact that you existed in sleep be
sure you were also aware of that existence.
What you were really unaware of in sleep is your bodily
existence. You are confounding this bodily awareness with
the true awareness of the Self, which is eternal. 
Prajñāna
,
which is the source of “I-am”-ness, ever subsists
unaffected by the three transitory states of the mind, thus
enabling you to retain your identity unimpaired.
Prajñāna
 is also beyond the three states, because it can
subsist without them and in spite of them.
It is that Reality that you should seek during your so-
called waking state by tracing the 
aham-vṛtti
 to its source.
Intense practice in this inquiry will reveal that the mind
and its three states are unreal and that you are the
eternal, infinite Consciousness of pure Being, the Self, or
the Heart.
Notes
1
. These are not the same as the 
chakras
.
2
. The acts of sleeping children, like eating and drinking,
are acts only in the eyes of others and not in their own. They
therefore do not really do those acts in spite of their
appearing to do them.
3
. The idea that one is one’s body is what is called
hṛdayagranthi
 (knot of the heart). Of the various knots, this
knot, which binds together what is conscious with what is
insentient, is what causes bondage.
4
. The seven 
jñāna bhūmikas
 are:
śubhecchā
 (the desire for enlightenment)
vichāraṇa
 (inquiry)
tanumānasa
 (tenuous mind)
sattvāpatti
 (self-realization)
asaṃsakti
 (nonattachment)
padārthābhāvana
 (nonperception of objects)
turyaga
 (transcendence)
Those who have attained the last four 
bhūmikas
 are called
brahmavit
, 
brahmavidvara
, 
brahmavidvariya
, and 
brahmavid
variṣṭha
 respectively.
5
. These terms literally mean “the all,” “brilliance,” and
“wisdom,” respectively. Śrī Ramana here uses them in
association with 
jāgrat
 (sleeping), 
svapna
 (dreaming), and
suṣupti
 (deep sleep). —
Publisher’s note
6
. The word 
contemplation
 is often used loosely as
referring to a forced mental process, whereas 
samādhi
 lies
beyond effort. However, in the language of Christian
mysticism, 
contemplation
 is the synonym invariably used for
samādhi
, and it is in this sense that the word is used here.
7
. The distinction between sleep, 
kevala nirvikalpa
samādhi
, 
and 
sahaja nirvikalpa samādhi
 can be clearly put in
tabular form as given by Śrī Bhagavan:
Sleep
Kevala Nirvikalpa
Samādhi
Sahaja Nirvikalpa
Samādhi
1.
Mind
alive
1.
Mind alive
1.
Mind dead
2.
Sunk in
oblivion
2.
Sunk in Light
2.
Resolved into the
Self
3.
Like a bucket tied to
a rope and left lying
in the water in a well
3.
Like a river
discharged into the
ocean and its identity
lost
4.
To be drawn out by
the other end of the
rope
4.
A river cannot be
redirected from the
ocean
The mind of the Sage who has realized the Self is wholly
destroyed. It is dead. But to the onlooker, he may seem to
possess a mind just like the layman. Hence the “I” in the
Sage has merely an apparent objective reality; in fact,
however, it has neither subjective existence nor objective
reality.
8
. See the discussion of the term 
hṛdayam
 in the 
next
chapter
.
Glossary
ābhāsa
   reflection of consciousness
abhyāsa
   practice
Advaita   the philosophical teaching of nonduality
aham
   “I”
ahaṃkāra
   “the doer”; ego
aham-vṛtti
   “I”-thought
aikya mukti
   liberation
ajñāna
   ignorance
ajñāni
   one who has not realized the Self
ānandam
   bliss
antar-mukha
   “inwardness”; retaining the mind in the Heart
anubhava
   experience; realization
anuṣṭhāna
   practice; attainment of knowledge
arthavāda
   auxiliary argument
ārudha
   attainment
asan
 (Skt., 
asana
)  posture (as in the classic positions of
Hatha Yoga)
āśrama
   one of the four stations of life of a spiritual seeker;
also, the dwelling of a sage and his disciples
ātma-jñāni
   one who knows the Self
Ātman
   the Self
ātma niṣṭha
   established in the Self
Atma prajñā
   innate self-consciousness
ātma śakti
   potency of the Self
ātma-siddhi
   Self-realization
ātma-vichāra
   Self-inquiry
ātma-vidya
   knowledge of the Self
ātma vyavahāra
   communion with the Self
bahir-mukha
   “externalization”; letting the mind go out of
the Heart
bhajana
   worship
bhakta
   devotee
bhakti
   devotion
bhāvanā
   feeling of deep devotion; the contemplation of a
personified deity with great emotion
bhūmikā
   stage
brahmachāri
, 
brahmachārin
   student (one of the four
stations of life)
brahmacharya
   state of religious students
Brahma-jñāna
   realization of one’s absolute being
Brahman
   the Universal Self; the Absolute
chakras
   subtle centers of energy in the body
chidābhāsa
   reflected consciousness
chidānanda
   bliss of the Self
chit
   intelligence; consciousness
chit-jada granthi
   the “knot between pure consciousness and
the insentient body”; the ego
dehātma-buddhi
   “I am the body” idea
dhātus
   humors; constituent elements of the body
dhyāna
   repetition of a mantra or name of God with
devotion; meditation through deliberate mental effort
dhyāna siddhi
   successful meditation
Dvaita   the philosophical teaching of dualism
ekānta vāsa
   “dwelling in solitude”; free from mental
concepts
granthi nāśam
   destruction of the knot (of ignorance)
gṛhastha
   householder (one of the four stations of life)
Guru
   spiritual preceptor
Guru-kṛpa
   Guru’s grace
hṛdayagranthi
   “knot of the heart”; the idea that one is one’s
body
hṛdayam
   the Heart
irai-pani-nittal
   “living in the service of God”
Īśvara  God; the Lord
Īśvara-svarūpa
   the true form of God
jada
   insentient
jagat
   the world
jāgrat
   the waking state
jāgrat-suṣupti
   absolute quiescence; “waking sleep”; the
state of being aware but not concerned
japa
   mental or verbal utterance of the names of God or
mantras
jīva
   the individual soul
jīvanmukta
   realized soul
jñāna
   knowledge
jñāna-bhūmikās
   stages of knowledge
jñāna-dṛṣti
   wisdom-insight
jñāna grantha
   Vedantic works
jñāna-vichāra
   inquiry regarding knowledge
jñāni
   sage; a knower of 
Brahman
karma
   the collective results of one’s actions; the chain of
cause and effect
karma-yogi
   one who follows the yoga of selfless action
kartṛtva
   “the doer”
kevala nirvikalpa
   the state of remaining without concepts
lakṣya
   attention; aim, target
manonāśa
   destruction of the mind
manonigraha
   rendering the mind quiescent
mantra
   sacred syllable(s) repeated in meditation
māyā
   illusion
māyāśakti
   the power of 
māyā
mokṣa
   liberation
mouna
  (Skt., 
mauna
)   silence
mukti
   liberation
nāda
   sound
nāḍīs
   psychic nerves
nāma
   name
nāma-japa
   repetition of the name of God
namaskār
 (Skt., 
namaskāra
)   homage
nirguṇopāsana
   contemplation of the attributeless 
Brahman
nirvāṇa
   final liberation
nirvikalpa samādhi
   an advanced state of meditation in
which there is no awareness of the world
nityam
   eternal
nivṛtti
   cessation of activity
om
   a mystic syllable, used as a 
mantra
para
   God
para-bhakti
   supreme devotion
paripūrṇam
   the perfect state
prajñā
   wisdom
prajñāna
   full consciousness
prakṛti
   the unmanifest (nature)
prāṇa
   one of the five vital airs or breaths
praṇayāma
   breath control
prārabdha
   the result of one’s past actions, encountered in
the present life
prasād
 (Skt., 
prasāda
)   divine blessing
pūrṇam
   plenum; fullness
puruṣa
   the Self
pūrva saṃskāras
   latent tendencies
ṛṣi
   seer; sage
rajas
   activity
sadguru
   true teacher
sādhaka
   spiritual aspirant
sādhana
   spiritual practice
sadśiṣya
   true disciple
sahaja jñāni
   sage in the state of 
sahaja nirvikalpa samādhi
sahaja nirvikalpa samādhi
   natural state of absorption in the
Self with no concepts
sahasrāra
   “the thousand-petaled lotus”; one of the 
chakras
samādhi
   advanced state of meditation; absorption in the
Self
saṃkalpas
   fancies
saṃsāra
   the bondage of life, death, and rebirth
saṃskāras
   past tendencies; impressions created by
previous actions and thoughts
sannyāsa
   asceticism; renunciation
sannyasāśrama
   the last of the four stations of life
sannyāsin
   ascetic; renunciate
Sarveśvara   the supreme Lord
śastras
   scriptures
sat
   existence; being
sat-chit
   being-consciousness
sat-chit-ānanda
   existence-consciousness-bliss
sattvic
 (from Skt. 
sattva
)   pure
sāyujya
   union; identity
siddhi
   accomplishment; supernatural power
śrutis
   sacred texts
stuti
   singing the praises of the Lord with devotion
śuddha-sattva svarūpa
   utter purity
śūnyavādin
   nihilist
suṣupti
   deep sleep
svapna
   the dreaming state
tadākāranilai
   “abiding in the form of That”; abiding in the
Self
taijasa
   brilliance
tamas
   inertia
tattvas
   categories, principles
turīya
   “the fourth state” (following those of waking,
dreaming, and deep sleep)
turīyātita
   “beyond the fourth (state)”; the Self
upadeśa
   instruction
upāsana
   contemplation
vairāgya
   dispassion; nonattachment
variṣṭha
   “the most excellent”
vāsanās
   impressions; latent tendencies
vāsanā-kṣaya
   destruction of mental tendencies
vastu
   substance
vichāra
   inquiry
vichāra mārga
   path of inquiry
vijñāna
   knowledge
vikalpas
   doubts
Viśiṣtādvaita   qualified nondualism
viśva
   the all
vīveka
   wisdom
vṛtti
   mental concept
yoga
   spiritual path or practice; way to union with 
Brahman
yoga-māyā
   magical power
yoga-mārgas
   yogic paths
yogi
   follower of a path of 
yoga
 
 
Sign up to receive news and special offers from
Shambhala Publications.
Or visit us online to sign up at
shambhala.com/eshambhala
.
